/WP(C) 244/17
1
ITEM NO.57+60+64           COURT NO.2               SECTION PIL(W)
                S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Writ Petition (Civil) No.244/2017
EDUCATION PROMOTION SOCIETY OF INDIA AND ORS       Petitioner(s)
                                 VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS                             Respondent(s)
(With appln. (s) for ad-interim ex-parte stay and office report)
WITH  W.P.(C) No.238/2017
(With   appln.(s)   for   bringing   on   record   the   additional   facts   and
stay and office report)
W.P.(C) No.258/2017
(With appln.(s) for ex-parte stay and office report)
Date : 04/05/2017 These petitions were called on for hearing today.
CORAM : 
          HON&#39;BLE MR. JUSTICE DIPAK MISRA
          HON&#39;BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. KHANWILKAR
          HON&#39;BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR
For Petitioner(s) Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Adv.
                  Mr. Balaji Srinivasan, AOR
Ms. Vaishnavi Subrahmanyam, Adv.
Mr. Zeeshan Divan, Adv.
Ms. Pratiksha Mishra, Adv.
Mr. Abhishek Bharti, Adv.
Mr. Prashanth Murthy SG, Adv.
WP(C) 238/17 Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Amit Anand Tiwari, AOR
Ms. Vishakha, Adv.
Mr. Karthik Raja Sekhar, Adv. 
WP(C) 258/17 Mr. V. Giri, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Ramesh Babu M.R., AOR 
                     
For Respondent(s) Mr. Vikas Singh, Sr. Adv.
                  Mr. Gaurav Sharma, AOR
Ms. Amandeep Kaur, Adv.
Mr. Prateek Bhatia, Adv.
WP(C) 244/17
2
Mr. Dhawal Mohan, Adv.
Ms. Vara Gaur, Adv.
Ms. Deepeika Kalia, Adv.
Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Vibhu Shanker Mishra, Adv.
Ms. Vimla Sinha, Adv.
Ms. Samta P. Mishra, Adv.
Mr. G.S. Makker, Adv.
                  Mr. M. Yogesh Kanna, AOR
Ms. Nithya, Adv.
Mrs. Maha Lakshmi, Adv.
Mr. Partha Sarathi, Adv.
Mr. Ravindra Agarwal, AOR
WP(C) 238/17 Mr. S.R. Singh, Sr. Adv.
Mr. A.K. Prasad, Adv.
Mr. Abhisth Kumar, AOR
WP(C) 238/17 Ms. Kiran Bhardwaj, Adv.
Mr. Tushar Bakshi, Adv.
Mr. Mukesh Kumar Maroria, AOR
WP(C) 258/17 Mr. B. Balaji, AOR
WP(C) 258/17 Mr. Jaideep Gupta, Sr. Adv.
Mr. G. Prakash, Adv.
Mr. Jishnu M.L., Adv.
Mrs. Priyanka Prakash, Adv.
Mrs. Beena Prakash, Adv.
Mr. Manu Srinath, Adv.
                     
           UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                              O R D E R
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
In   the   course   of   hearing,   after   due   deliberation,
certain suggestions have been given by the Medical Council of
India   for   admission   to   the   post   graduate   courses   in   deemed
Universities.  
Having   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   parties,   it   is
directed as follows:-
WP(C) 244/17
3
(i) Common   counseling   for   admission   to   post
graduate medicine courses in deemed universities shall be
conducted   by   the   State   Government   or   the   authority
designated by the State Government.
(ii) In   cases   where   the   deemed   university   has
accepted applications from the candidates, the same shall
be   forwarded   to   the   State   Government   or   authority
designated by the State Government.  The State Government
or the authority designated by the State Government shall
include   the   names   of   the   candidates   who   had   applied   to
the   deemed   universities   and   prepare   a   common   list   of
students   in  order   of  merit.     However,   the  application   of
those   students   who   have   already   taken   admission   in   any
post   graduate   medicine   course   in   any   medical   college
shall not be considered by the State Government.
(iii) During the common counseling conducted by State
Government   the   representatives   of   the   deemed
universities,   including   representatives   of   those   deemed
universities   who   are   also   minority   institutions,   should
be   a   part   of   the   admission/counseling   committee,   as   the
case may be.
(iv) The   students   who   secure   admission   in   post
graduate   medicine   courses,   at   the   time   of   common
counseling   itself,   should   be   made   to   deposit   with   the
admission/counseling   committee,   the   demand   draft   towards
the   tuition   fees   payable   to   the   concerned   deemed
university.   The   admission/counseling   committee   shall
forthwith   forward   the   demand   draft   to   the   respective
deemed universities.
(v) In   institutions   run   by   minorities,   the   seats
reserved   for   minorities,   if   any,   will   be   filled   up   by
minority   students   in   order   of   merit,   as   a   result   of
WP(C) 244/17
4
which,   rights   of   minority   institutions   are   fully
protected.     In   the   event   of   any   seat   in   a   minority
institution   is  not   filled  up   by  a   minority  student,   then
the said seat shall be filled up by the General category
student in order of merit.
(vi) Any   deemed   university,   which   has   got   the
applications,   as   indicated   earlier,   can   send   them   to   the
Common   Counseling   Committee   of   the   respective   States.
That   apart,   the   deemed   universities   are   entitled   to
receive applications till 8 th
  May, 2017, and send them by
e-mail   to   the   aforesaid   authorities   latest   by   7   p.m.   on
that day.
The   counseling,   as   we   have   been   apprised,   shall
commence from 11 th
 May, 2017.  Needless to say, the counseling
process   shall   be   based   on   All   India   merit   list.     The
aforesaid   directions   are   given   keeping   in   view   that   the
petitioners are deemed universities.  The present arrangement
is made for academic session 2017-2018.  Needless to say, the
arrangement is meant for the post graduate courses and it is
without   prejudice   to   the   contentions   raised   by   the
petitioners.  
The   pleadings   shall   be   completed   on   or   before
31 st
 August, 2017.
Let the matters be listed on 20 th
 September, 2017.
(Chetan Kumar)
Court Master (H.S. Parasher)
Court Master
