1
ITEM NO.1     Court 4 (Video Conferencing)          SECTION X
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Writ Petition(s)(Civil)  No(s).  743/2021
ASSOCIATION OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.Petitioner(s)
                                VERSUS
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              Respondent(s)
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.77596/2021-GRANT OF INTERIM RELIEF and IA
No.77599/2021-APPLICATION  FOR  EXEMPTION  FROM  FILING  ORIGINAL
VAKALATNAMA/OTHER DOCUMENT )
 
Date : 05-08-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
CORAM : 
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. KHANWILKAR
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
For Petitioner(s)
Mr. R. P. Gupta, AOR
Mr. Manish Vaish, Adv.
Mr. Devajit Saikia, Sr. Adv.(AG)
Mr. Debojit Borkakati, AOR
Ms. Rukmini Barua, Adv.
Ms. Padmini Barua, Adv.
Mr. Vivek Sonker, Adv.
                   
For Respondent(s)
Mr. Rupesh Kumar, AOR
Mr. Rajeev Sharma, Adv.
Ms. Neelam Sharma, Adv.
Ms. Pankhuri Shrivastava, Adv.
Mr. Pravesh Bahuguna, Adv.
Mr. Alekshendra Sharma, Adv.
Mr. K.M. Natraj, ASG
Ms. Swarupama Chaturvedi, Adv.
Mr. Rupesh Kumar, Adv. 
Mr. B. K. Satija, Adv.
Mr. Vatsal Joshi, Adv.
Mr. Gurmeet Singh Makker, AOR
Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, Sr. Adv. 
Mr. J.K. Das, Sr. Adv. 
Mr. Sandeep Das, Adv. 
Ms. Akanksha, Adv. 
Ms. Mishika Bajpai, Adv. 
Mr. Shaswat Sarin, Adv. 
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2021.08.06
10:19:50 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified
2
Mr. Sandeep Devashish Das, AOR
                    
          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
The matter was adjourned on the earlier occasion to
enable the two boards i.e., Central Board of Secondary
Education (C.B.S.E.) and Indian Certificate of Secondary
Education (I.C.S.E.) to respond to the proposal given by
Mr.  Fali  S.  Nariman,  learned  Senior  Advocate,  counsel
appearing for the petitioners. 
In  response,  the  boards  have  filed  separate
affidavits making firm commitment about the Schedule. As
there was some ambiguity in the affidavit filed by the
C.B.S.E., on instructions, learned counsel appearing for
the  C.B.S.E.  has  submitted  a  schedule  for  conducting
exams
 
for
 
Improvement/Compartment/Private/Patrachar
students of Class XII and Class X.
The schedule indicated by I.C.S.E in paragraph 5 of
this affidavit reads thus:-
"The  following  schedule  for  the  afore  stated
"Improvement Examinations" will be followed: 
04.08.2021:  The  Candidates  should  register
themselves  for  the  improvement  examinations
with  the  Respondent  No.3  Board  by  August  4,
2021. 
5/6.08.2021:  The  Respondent  No.3  Board  will
declare a detailed examination schedule by 5th
or 6th August, 2021. 
16.08.2021:
The
 
improvement
 
examinations
3
shall commence on August 16, 2021. 
20.09.2021:
The  results  for  the  Improvement
Examinations shall be declared around September
20, 2021." 
The Schedule given by C.B.S.E. reads thus:
"CBSE Schedule 
Following schedule will be followed of CBSE for
conducting  Exams  Improvement/Compartment/Private/
Pratrachar Students of Classes XII & X:
10.08.2021
CBSE  Portal  will  be  opened  for
Students for registration. 
10.08.2021
Circular  will  be  issued  by  CBSE
declaring Date Sheet for Exams. 
25.08.2021
Commencement of Exams. 
15.09.2021
Completion of Exams with last Paper. 
30.09.2021
Date for declaration of Results."
In  light  of  this  assurance  given  by  two  Boards,
nothing more needs to be done regarding the apprehension
of the petitioners and similarly placed persons about the
uncertainty in conducting examinations and declaration of
results thereof by the respective boards. 
The other apprehension put forth by Mr. Ravi Prakash
Gupta,  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners,  during  the
course of arguments today, is that, the students, who are
affected due to the decision of the Result Committee of
reduction of their marks are not being informed about the
extent of reduction.  
In this regard, learned counsel for the C.B.S.E., on
4
instructions,  submitted  that  C.B.S.E  will  issue
instructions  to  all  the  schools  registered  under  that
Board  to  notify  the  internal  assessment  marks,  highest
average  in  the  preceding  three  years  and  the  marks
assigned by the Result Committee on case to case basis.
That  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  concerned
school(s) where the students are pursuing studies. This
arrangement, in our opinion, would redress the grievance
of the petitioners. 
Mr. Ravi Prakash Gupta, learned counsel appearing for
the  petitioners  would  then  submit  that  the  boards  be
directed  to  refund  the  examination  fees  collected  from
the concerned students in respect of examinations, which
have  been  cancelled.  The  argument  though  attractive  at
the  first  blush  needs  to  be  rejected.   For,  the
explanation  offered  by  the  boards  on  affidavit  about
their inability to refund the stated amount having spent
the same for preparatory work and for making logistical
arrangements for conducting the examination which had to
be cancelled at the last minute, commends to us.  Hence,
this  issue  raised  by  the  petitioners  does  not  merit
consideration. 
The last grievance made by Mr. Ravi Prakash Gupta,
5
learned counsel is in respect of the Notification issued
by  the  State  of  Assam  bearing  No.  PMA  (S)  71/2021/12
dated  01.07.2021  and  Notification  No.  ASE.16/2016/Pt-
II/68 dated 01.07.2021, respectively. 
The Government of Assam has now issued Notification
on  08.07.2021  to  annul  paragraph  5  of  the  earlier
Notification and has declared that the marksheets issued
by the concerned board would be valid for all purposes. 
Mr.  Ravi  Prakash  Gupta,  learned  counsel,  however,
submits  that  the  second  paragraph  of  the  Notification
dated  08.07.2021  (Annexure-R/4)  may  create  some
difficulty and uncertainty. 
We find no merits in this submission.  For, learned
counsel for the State of Assam has made it amply clear
that the State may have to conduct equalizing examination
for  the  purpose  of  recruitment,  if  it  is  not  in  a
position  to  determine  the  relative  merits  of  the
candidates on the basis of the marksheet issued in the
current  year  and  those  who  had  appeared  in  the
examination  in  the  previous  years.   In  any  case,  the
equalizing  examination  for  the  purpose  of  recruitment
would  apply  to  all  candidates  and  not  limited  to  the
candidates, who have been issued marksheets by the two
6
boards referred to in the Notification dated 01.07.2021. 
In view of this, nothing more is required to be said.
As no other issue has been raised before us, the writ
petition stands disposed of accordingly. 
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(DEEPAK SINGH)                                  (VIDYA NEGI)
COURT MASTER (SH)                               COURT MASTER (NSH)
