1
REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1007 OF 2021
UNIVERSITY OF DELHI                                 
    …APPELLANT(S)
VERSUS
DELHI UNIVERSITY CONTRACT EMPLOYEES 
UNION & ORS.   
 
           …RESPONDENT(S)
 
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO.  1008 OF 2021
(Delhi University Contract Employees Union and anr.  vs.  University of Delhi and ors.)
J U D G M E N T
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.  
These appeals arise out of the final judgment and order dated 22.11.2016
passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in LPA No. 989/2013.  The
appeal preferred by University of Delhi (“the University” for short) i.e. Civil
Appeal No. 1007 of 2021 arising out of SLP(C) No. 17486 of 2017 is taken as
the lead matter.
2.
While  allowing  the  Letters  Patent  Appeal  preferred  by  the  Delhi
University  Contract  Employees’ Union  (“the  Union”  for  short)  &  Others,
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2021.03.25
19:53:43 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified
2
following conclusions were arrived at and directions were issued by the Division
Bench of the High Court:-
“Conclusion
I.
The decision of the University of Delhi to grant one
time age exemption to all contract labour who may have
served for over a year on such basis for participating in the
selection in effect is in the nature of the Scheme postulated
by the Supreme Court in para 53 of Umadevi. It cannot be
denied that such opportunity to participate in the selection
process has to be meaningful.
II. In view of the age relaxation given by the University of
Delhi, an opportunity to undergo the selection process was
made available to all contract employees who had worked
for one year or more on contract. As a result of such
opportunity, the contract workers were rendered entitled to
be tested on a realistic and fair scale and benchmark. There
is substance in the grievance of the contractual employees
that to test them on the same standards as new applicants is
to deprive them of a fair and meaningful opportunity to
participate in the selection process.
III.  The  Delhi  University  admits  that  the  contract
employees who applied under the last recruitment drive i.e.
6th November, 2013 possessed the requisite qualifications
as per the recruitment rules of 2008. Regular vacant posts
were available when they were appointed. Therefore, so far
as all those who applied are concerned, their qualifications
stand  verified.  Furthermore,  their  original  appointments
could also, at the worst, be termed irregular and not illegal.
IV. There is substance in the grievance of the appellants
that pursuant to the notification dated 6th November, 2013,
they have not been subjected to a test that is fair and
appropriate for them. The respondent-University ought to
have designed an appropriate mechanism for testing the
appellants having regard to the date when they would have
acquired their qualifications. Beside the appointment drive
conducted by the respondent-University, they have regular
post available for making appointments pursuant to a test
3
appropriately designed for the appellants and other persons
based like them.
V. The appellants and others like them have served the
organisation for long years, and, it is evident that even if
their having acquired academic qualifications much before
the new applicants, the deficiency, if any, is made good by
the valuable experience acquired by them by virtue of the
years of service. The learned Single Judge has fallen into
error in treating the writ petition as one seeking a relief of
regularisation.
VI. The respondents were unable to fill up the vacancies
pursuant to the process initiated by the notification dated 6th
November, 2013 which are still available.
VII. In view of the passage of time, it would be unfair to
the appellants as well as the respondents to remand the
matter  for  consideration  of  the  above.  This  court  is
adequately  empowered  to  mould  the  relief  to  ensure
complete justice to the parties.
Result
102. In view thereof, this appeal is disposed of with a
direction to the University of Delhi to design and hold an
appropriate test for selection in terms of the notification
dated 6th November, 2013 having regard to the fact that the
persons  working  on  contract  basis  covered  under  the
notification dated 6th November, 2013 had obtained their
essential qualifications much before the fresh applicants;
that they have rendered satisfactory service and bring with
them the benefit of the knowledge acquired by experience
gained while working on contract basis with the Delhi
University.
103. It is also clarified that the same persons who shall be
so tested would be those who would be eligible pursuant to
the advertisement dated 6th November, 2013.
The  impugned  order  of  the  Single  Judge  dated  16th
December, 2013 is modified to this extent and the appeal is
disposed of with the above directions.”
4
3. 
The relevant facts for the present purpose, in brief, are as under:-
A)
By communication dated 31.08.1999 the University Grants Commission
(“UGC”, for short) imposed a ban on filling up of non-teaching posts in all
institutes/universities  and  the  affiliated  colleges.   The  relevant  part  of  the
directions issued by the UGC were:-
“(2)Ban on filling up of vacant posts.
Every University/College shall undertake a review of
all the posts, which are lying vacant in the Universities and
in the affiliated Colleges and subordinate offices, etc., in
consultation  with  the  University  Grants  Commission.
Financial Advisers will ensure that the review is completed
in a time bound manner and full details of vacant posts in
their respective Universities etc. are available.  TILL THE
REVIEW  IS  COMPLETED,  NO  VACANT  POSTS
SHALL  BE  FILLED  UP  EXCEPT  WITH  THE
APPROVAL  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  GRANTS
COMMISSION.”
These directions were reiterated by UGC in subsequent letters.
B) 
On 12.01.2011 the UGC sanctioned and allowed the University to fill up
255 posts of Junior Assistants while suggesting changes in Recruitment Rules of
the University.  Accordingly, Recruitment Rules (Non-Teaching Employees)
2008 were amended by the University and an advertisement was published on
06.11.2013 in the leading newspapers inviting applications for 255 posts of
Junior Assistants in the University.
5
C) 
However, during the period from 2003 to 2013 various appointments
were made by the University on contract basis as a result of which about 300
Junior Assistants are presently in the employment of the University on contract
basis, most of whom are members of the Union.
D)
Soon  after  the  advertisement  dated  06.11.2013,  Writ  Petition  (C)
No.7929 of 2013 was filed by the Union seeking following reliefs:-
“(i) To direct the Respondents to formulate a scheme for
regularising  the  services  of  members  of  the  petitioner
Union  and  other  petitioners  working  on  contract/ad
hoc/daily wage basis after relaxing age requirement so as to
confer on them permanent status;
(ii) To direct Respondent no. 1 to pay salary to all the
members of the petitioner Union and other petitioners at the
rate of the minimum salary of the grade to which they have
been appointed as is done by Respondent No. 1 in respect
of Assistant Professors of the University/Colleges;
(iii)To direct Respondent No. 1 to pay to all the members
of the petitioner Union and other petitioners who have
worked for six months or 240 days in each year of their
employment  with  Respondent  No.  1  on  ad
hoc/contract/daily  wage  basis  non-productivity  linked
bonus retrospectively from the date(s) of their employment;
(iv) To direct Respondent No. 1 to fill up all vacancies in
future  as  and  when  they  arise  within  six  months  of
occurrence to avoid any ad hoc/contractual arrangement in
future;
 
(v) To direct Respondent No. 1 to grant maternity leave and
other benefits to women employees; To allow this writ
petition with costs; and
(vi) To pass any other appropriate order and/or direction
6
which  this  Hon’ble  court  deems  fit  and  proper  in  the
interest of justice.”
E) 
A Single Judge of the High Court by his order dated 16.12.2013 rejected
said writ petition. Relying on the decision of this Court in Secretary, State of
Karnataka & Ors. vs. Umadevi & Ors.1, it was observed:-
“2. All the issues which have been urged in the present
petition  stand  settled  against  the  petitioners  by  the
Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. vs. Umadevi
& Ors., (2006) 4 SCC 1.  The Supreme Court in the case of
Umadevi (supra) has laid down the following ratio:-
“(I)
The questions to be asked before regularization
are:-
(a)(i) Was there a sanctioned post (court cannot order
creation of posts because finances of the state may go
haywire), (ii) is there a vacancy, (iii) are the persons
qualified persons and (iv) are the appointments through
regular recruitment process of calling all possible persons
and which process involves inter-se competition among
the candidates.
(b)
A  court  can  condone  an  irregularity  in  the
appointment procedure only if the irregularity does not
go to the root of the matter.
(II)
For sanctioned posts having vacancies, such posts
have  to  be  filled  by  regular  recruitment  process  of
prescribed  procedure  otherwise,  the  constitutional
mandate flowing from Articles 14, 16, 309, 315, 320 etc.
is violated.
(III) In case of existence of necessary circumstances the
government has a right to appoint contract employees or
casual  labour  or  employees  for  a  project,  but,  such
persons form a class in themselves and they cannot claim
equality (except possibly for equal pay for equal work)
with regular employees who form a separate class.  Such
1 (2006) 4 SCC 1
7
temporary employees cannot claim legitimate expectation
of absorption/regularization as they knew when they were
appointed  that  they  were  temporary  inasmuch  as  the
government did not give and nor could have given an
assurance  of  regularization  without  the  regular
recruitment  process  being followed.   Such  irregularly
appointed persons cannot claim to be regularized alleging
violation of Article 21.  Also the equity in favour of the
millions  who  await  public  employment  through  the
regular  recruitment  process  outweighs  the  equity  in
favour of the limited number of irregularly appointed
persons who claim regularization.
(IV) Once there are vacancies in sanctioned posts such
vacancies  cannot  be  filled  in  except  without  regular
recruitment process, and thus neither the court nor the
executive can frame a scheme to absorb or regularize
persons appointed to such posts without following the
regular recruitment process.
(V)
At the instance of persons irregularly appointed the
process  of  regular  recruitment  shall  not  be  stopped.
Courts  should  not  pass  interim  orders  to  continue
employment  of  such  irregularly  appointed  persons
because the same will result in stoppage of recruitment
through regular appointment procedure.
(VI) If there are sanctioned posts with vacancies, and
qualified  persons  were  appointed  without  a  regular
recruitment process, then, such persons who when the
judgment of Uma Devi1 is passed have worked for over
10  years  without  court  orders,  such  persons  be
regularized under schemes to be framed by the concerned
organization.
(VII) The aforesaid law which applies to the Union and
the States will also apply to all instrumentalities of the
State governed by Article 12 of the Constitution.”
3.
Para-4  of  the  judgment  in  the  case  of  Umadevi1
specifically directs that Courts should desist from issuing
orders preventing regular selection or recruitment at the
instance of persons who are only adhoc/contractual/casual
employees and who have not secured regular appointments
as  per  procedure  established.   The  Supreme  Court  has
further observed that passing of orders preventing regular
recruitment tends to defeat the very constitutional scheme
of public employment and that powers under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India therefore cannot be exercised for
perpetuating illegalities, irregularities or improprieties or
8
for scuttling the whole scheme of public employment.
4.  In  the  present  case,  it  cannot  be  and  could  not  be
disputed that employment to be given pursuant to the posts
which have been advertised by the advertisement dated
6.11.2013 is with respect to regular posts or permanent
posts. Accordingly, in view of the ratio of the judgment in
the case of Umadevi1 , and more particularly para-4 thereof,
this Court cannot interdict the regular selection process. I
may note that the learned senior counsel for respondent no.
1  states  that  regular  employment  in  the  posts  now
advertised could not be given earlier because of a ban on
regular recruitments imposed by UGC. Since that ban has
been  lifted,  regular posts are now  being  advertised  for
being filled in. I may note that I take the statement on
record  made  on  behalf  of  respondent  no.  1  that  the
University is going to give age relaxation to all candidates
in its employment which would be the length of service
which  has  been  rendered  by  that  employee  in  the
employment of respondent no. 1-University while working
on casual/adhoc/temporary status basis. This statement is
made pursuant to the letter dated 5.12.2013 which is placed
on record.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner seeks to argue that
respondent-University is appointing persons on contractual
basis pursuant to the earlier advertisement dated 30.5.2013
and which should not be done in view of the ratio of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Umadevi1.
This  argument  is  misconceived  for  various  reasons.
Firstly, Umadevi's case (supra) does not state that State is
not  bound  to  make  permanent  appointment.  In
fact, Umadevi1 allows State and instrumentalities of State as
per  exigency  of  situation  also  to  make
contractual/casual/temporary  appointments.  In  any  case,
this argument is also rejected for the reason that learned
senior counsel on instruction states that posts advertised in
terms of the advertisement dated 30.5.2013 in fact merge
with  the  advertisement  now  issued  on  6.11.2013  by
requiring appointments to such posts only to be made as
regular appointments and in permanent employment.”
F)  
In  the  recruitment  process  pursuant  to  the  advertisement  dated
9
06.11.2013,  the  Junior  Assistants  employed  on  contractual  basis,  also
participated.  All contractual appointees were granted age relaxation.  However,
only 120 regular appointments could be made by the University out of which 10
were contractual appointees and members of the Union.
G) 
The Union, being aggrieved by the dismissal of its Writ Petition, filed
LPA No.989/2013 before the Division Bench of the High Court.  During the
pendency of said Appeal, factual details pertaining to the members of the Union
were placed on record, which show that the earliest contract employees were
appointed in the year 2003 while the last appointees were of the year 2013.  The
details can be tabulated as under:-
Sl. No.
Year of appointment
 No. of contract
appointees
1
2003
12
2.
2004
7
3.
2005
19
4.
2006
37
5.
2007
36
6.
2008
19
7.
2009
33
8.
2010
14
9.
2011
12
10.
2012
1
11.
2013
2
TOTAL
192
10
H) 
By its judgment and order dated 22.11.2016, the Division Bench of the
High Court allowed the appeal to the extent indicated above and the University
was directed to design and hold an appropriate test for selection in terms of
Notification dated 06.11.2013.
I) 
Being aggrieved, the University filed the instant appeal.  The Union also
preferred an independent appeal i.e. Civil Appeal No.1008 of 2021 arising out of
SLP(C)No.4906 of 2021. By its interim order dated 04.07.2017, the direction to
hold special tests was stayed by this Court but it was directed that the contract
employees would continue to work in the positions held by them on provisional
basis until the next round of selections.   The contract employees were however
granted liberty to participate in any selection process held in future.
 
4. 
When these appeals came up before this Court on 22.10.2019, it was
noted that even after the selection undertaken in the year 2013 there remained
regular vacancies.  The University was therefore directed to file an appropriate
affidavit indicating the status.  
In the affidavit dated 13.11.2019 the University indicated that 124 regular
posts of Junior Assistants were then lying vacant.
5. 
In the affidavit dated 09.03.2021 filed on behalf of the University, it is
11
submitted that a decision has been taken that in order to facilitate the contractual
employees to participate in the recruitment process, age relaxation as well as
certain advantage for the service rendered as contract employees will be given
by the University.  Paragraphs 6 and 7 of said affidavit read are as under:-
“6. In  view  of  the  order  of  this  Court,  to  enable  the
contractual  employees  to  participate  in  the  recruitment
process, a comprehensive age relaxation with respect to the
upper age limit has been given to the contract employees
working  at  the  University  in  the  present  recruitment
process.
7. In addition to the above, a maximum of upto 10 extra
marks, depending on the number of years of service of the
contract employee, would be given to them while finalizing
the merit.”
6. 
Heard Mr. Santosh Kumar, learned Advocate for the University and Mr.
Colin Gonsalves, learned Senior Advocate for the Union.
It was submitted by Mr. Santosh Kumar, learned Advocate that the
directions issued by the Division Bench of the High Court were not consistent
with the law declared by this Court in Umadevi1 and the subsequent decisions of
this Court including that in Official Liquidator vs. Dayanand and Ors.2.  With
regard to the ensuing selection to be undertaken where the benefits in terms of
paragraphs 6 and 7 of the affidavit dated 09.03.2021 would be extended, it was
submitted that the total marks in the test would be 300 and grant of 10 marks
2 (2008) 10 SCC 1
12
would mean 3.33% advantage.
 
On the other hand, Mr. Gonsalves, learned Senior Advocate submitted
that even after the decision of this Court in Umadevi1, this Court extended the
benefit of regularization in certain cases.  He relied upon the decisions of this
Court in State of Karnataka and others vs. M.L. Kesari and others3;  State of
Gujarat and others vs. PWD Employees Union and others4; Nihal Singh and
others vs. State of Punjab and others5; Sheo Narain Nagar and others vs.
State of Uttar Pradesh and others6;  and Narendra Kumar Tiwari and others
vs. State of Jharkhand and others7.  
7.
The decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Umadevi1 was
pronounced on 10.04.2006 by which time, the earliest contract employees had
put in only 3-4 years of service and most of the contract employees were engaged
after the decision in Umadevi1.
In paragraphs 47, 49 and 53 of the decision in  Umadevi1, this Court
stated:- 
“47. When a person enters a temporary employment or gets
engagement  as  a  contractual  or  casual  worker  and  the
engagement  is  not  based  on  a  proper  selection  as
recognised by the relevant rules or procedure, he is aware
3 (2010) 9 SCC 247 [Paras 7 & 8]
4 (2013) 12 SCC 417 [Para 27]
5 (2013) 14 SCC 65
6 (2017) 14 SCALE 247 [Para 8]  = (2018) 13 SCC 432
7 (2018) 8 SCC 238
13
of the consequences of the appointment being temporary,
casual  or  contractual  in  nature.  Such  a  person  cannot
invoke  the  theory  of  legitimate  expectation  for  being
confirmed in the post when an appointment to the post
could be made only by following a proper procedure for
selection and in cases concerned, in consultation with the
Public  Service  Commission.  Therefore,  the  theory  of
legitimate expectation cannot be successfully advanced by
temporary, contractual or casual employees. It cannot also
be held that the State has held out any promise while
engaging these persons either to continue them where they
are  or  to  make  them  permanent.  The  State  cannot
constitutionally make such a promise. It is also obvious that
the theory cannot be invoked to seek a positive relief of
being made permanent in the post.
…   …
…
49. It is contended that the State action in not regularising
the employees was not fair within the framework of the
rule of law. The rule of law compels the State to make
appointments as envisaged by the Constitution and in the
manner we have indicated earlier. In most of these cases, no
doubt, the employees had worked for some length of time
but this has also been brought about by the pendency of
proceedings in tribunals and courts initiated at the instance
of the employees. Moreover, accepting an argument of this
nature would mean that the State would be permitted to
perpetuate an illegality in the matter of public employment
and that would be a negation of the constitutional scheme
adopted  by us,  the people  of  India. It  is  therefore not
possible  to  accept  the  argument  that  there  must  be  a
direction to make permanent all the persons employed on
daily wages. When the court is approached for relief by
way of a writ, the court has necessarily to ask itself whether
the person before it had any legal right to be enforced.
Considered in the light of the very clear constitutional
scheme, it cannot be said that the employees have been able
to establish a legal right to be made permanent even though
they have never been appointed in terms of the relevant
rules  or  in  adherence  of  Articles  14  and  16  of  the
Constitution.
…   …
…
14
53. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be cases
where irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as
explained in S.V. Narayanappa8, R.N. Nanjundappa9  and
B.N. Nagarajan10 and referred to in para 15 above, of duly
qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might
have been made and the employees have continued to work
for ten years or more but without the intervention of orders
of the courts or of tribunals. The question of regularisation
of  the  services  of  such  employees  may  have  to  be
considered on merits in the light of the principles settled by
this Court in the cases abovereferred to and in the light of
this judgment. In that context, the Union of India, the State
Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps
to regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such
irregularly
 
  appointed, who have worked for ten years or
more in duly sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders
of the courts or of tribunals and should further ensure that
regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those vacant
sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in cases where
temporary  employees  or  daily  wagers  are  being  now
employed. The process must be set in motion within six
months from this date. We also clarify that regularisation, if
any already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened
based on this judgment, but there should be no further
bypassing  of  the  constitutional  requirement  and
regularising or making permanent, those not duly appointed
as per the constitutional scheme.” 
(Emphasis added)
8.
The decision in Umadevi1 and other relevant decisions on the point were
considered by a Bench of three Judges of this Court in Official Liquidator  vs.
Dayanand and others2.  In that case, the decisions of the Calcutta High Court
and the Delhi High Court were under challenge.  The Single Judge of the
Calcutta High Court had directed absorption of Group ‘C’ staff, which direction
8   AIR 1967 SC 1071
9   (1972) 1 SCC 409
10  (1979) 4 SCC 507
15
was affirmed by the Division Bench.  Similarly, a Single Judge of the Delhi
High Court had directed absorption of the writ petitioners in their appropriate
scales with benefits such as fitment and promotions which directions were
affirmed in appeal by the Division Bench.    This Court accepted the challenge
and set aside the directions issued by the Calcutta High Court and the Delhi
High Court.  During the course of its Judgment, this Court made following
observations:-
“52. … In this context, we may also mention that though
the  Official  Liquidators  appear  to  have  issued
advertisements for appointing the company-paid staff and
made  some  sort  of  selection,  more  qualified  and
meritorious  persons  must  have  shunned  from  applying
because they knew that the employment will be for a fixed
term on fixed salary and their engagement will come to an
end with the conclusion of liquidation proceedings. As a
result of this, only mediocres must have responded to the
advertisements and joined as company-paid staff. In this
scenario, a direction for absorption of all the company-paid
staff  has  to  be  treated  as  violative  of  the  doctrine  of
equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[emphasis added]
…      …      …
75.  By  virtue  of  Article  141  of  the  Constitution,  the
judgment of the Constitution Bench in Umadevi1 is binding
on  all  the  courts  including  this  Court  till  the  same  is
overruled by a larger Bench. The ratio of the Constitution
Bench judgment has been followed by different two-Judge
Benches  for  declining  to  entertain  the  claim  of
regularisation of service made by ad hoc/temporary/daily-
wage/casual employees or for reversing the orders of the
High Court granting relief to such employees —  Indian
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. Workmen11, Gangadhar
11 (2007) 1 SCC 408
16
Pillai v. Siemens Ltd.12, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan v.
L.V.  Subramanyeswara13,  Hindustan  Aeronautics  Ltd. v.
Dan Bahadur Singh14. However, in  U.P. SEB v.  Pooran
Chandra Pandey15 on which reliance has been placed by
Shri Gupta, a two-Judge Bench has attempted to dilute the
Constitution Bench judgment by suggesting that the said
decision cannot be applied to a case where regularisation
has  been sought  for  in pursuance  of  Article  14 of  the
Constitution  and  that  the  same  is  in  conflict  with  the
judgment of the seven-Judge Bench in Maneka Gandhi v.
Union of India16.”
The Judgment  of  a Bench of two Judges of  this Court in  Pooran
Chandra Pandey16 was then found to be inconsistent with the law laid down by
this Court in Umadevi1.
9.
All the decisions relied upon by Mr. Colin Gonsalves, learned Senior
Advocate were by Benches of two Judges of this Court and in each of those
cases, the concerned employees had put in more than 10 years of service and
could claim benefit in terms of paragraph 53 of the decision in Umadevi1.  In
the last of those decisions i.e. in Narendra Kumar Tiwari7, the submission was
that the employees had not put in more than 10 years of service with the newly
created State of Jharkhand and, therefore, there was no entitlement in terms of
the decision in  Umadevi1.   Relying on the concept of one-time measure
elaborated in M.L. Kesari3, it was observed:-
12 (2007) 1 SCC 533
13 (2007) 5 SCC 326
14 (2007) 6 SCC 207
15 (2007) 11 SCC 92
16 (1978) 1 SCC 248
17
“3. The appellants had contended before the High Court
that the State of Jharkhand was created only on 15-11-2000
and therefore no one could have completed 10 years of ser-
vice with the State of Jharkhand on the cut-off date of 10-
4-2006. Therefore, no one could get the benefit of the Reg-
ularisation Rules which made the entire legislative exercise
totally meaningless. The appellants had pointed out in the
High Court that the State had issued Resolutions on 18-7-
2009 and 19-7-2009 permitting the regularisation of some
employees of the State, who had obviously not put in 10
years of service with the State. Consequently, it was sub-
mitted that the appellants were discriminated against for no
fault of theirs and in an irrational manner.
…      …      …
6. The   concept   of   a   one­time   measure   was   further   ex­
plained in Kesari3 in paras 9, 10 and 11 of the Report
which read as follows: (SCC pp. 250­51, paras 9­11)
‘9. The term “one-time measure” has to be under-
stood in its proper perspective. This would nor-
mally mean that after the decision in Umadevi1 ,
each department or each instrumentality should
undertake a one-time exercise and prepare a list
of all casual, daily-wage or ad hoc employees
who have been working for more than ten years
without the intervention of courts and tribunals
and subject them to a process verification as to
whether they are working against vacant posts
and possess the requisite qualification for the post
and if so, regularise their services.
10. At the end of six months from the date of de-
cision  in Umadevi1,  cases  of  several  daily-
wage/ad hoc/casual employees were still pending
before courts. Consequently, several departments
and instrumentalities did not commence the one-
time regularisation process. On the other hand,
some government departments or instrumentali-
ties undertook the one-time exercise excluding
several employees from consideration either on
the ground that their cases were pending in courts
or due to sheer oversight. In such circumstances,
the employees who were entitled to be considered
18
in terms of para 53 of the decision in Umadevi1,
will not lose their right to be considered for regu-
larisation, merely because the one-time exercise
was completed without considering their cases, or
because the six-month period mentioned in para
53 of Umadevi1  has expired. The one-time exer-
cise should consider all daily-wage/ad hoc/casual
employees who had put in 10 years of continuous
service as on 10-4-2006 without availing the pro-
tection of  any interim  orders of courts or tri-
bunals. If any employer had held the one-time ex-
ercise in terms of para 53 of Umadevi1, but did
not consider the cases of some employees who
were  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  para  53
of Umadevi1, the employer concerned should con-
sider their cases also, as a continuation of the
one-time exercise. The one-time exercise will be
concluded only when all the employees who are
entitled  to  be  considered  in  terms  of  para  53
of Umadevi1, are so considered.
11. The object behind the said direction in para 53
of Umadevi1  is twofold. First is to ensure that
those who have put in more than ten years of con-
tinuous service without the protection of any in-
terim orders of courts or tribunals, before the date
of decision in Umadevi1  was rendered, are con-
sidered for regularisation in view of their long
service.  Second  is  to  ensure  that  the
departments/instrumentalities  do  not  perpetuate
the  practice  of  employing  persons  on  daily-
wage/ad hoc/casual basis for long periods and
then periodically regularise them on the ground
that they have served for more than ten years,
thereby defeating the constitutional or statutory
provisions relating to recruitment and appoint-
ment. The true effect of the direction is that all
persons who have worked for more than ten years
as  on  10-4-2006  [the  date  of  decision
in Umadevi1  without the protection of any in-
terim order of any court or tribunal, in vacant
posts, possessing the requisite qualification, are
entitled to be considered for regularisation. The
19
fact that the employer has not undertaken such
exercise of regularisation within six months of the
decision in Umadevi1  or that such exercise was
undertaken only in regard to a limited few, will
not disentitle such employees, the right to be con-
sidered for regularisation in terms of the above
directions in Umadevi1  as a one-time measure.’
7. The purpose and intent of the decision in Umadevi  1 
was therefore twofold, namely, to prevent irregular or ille-
gal appointments in the future and secondly, to confer a
benefit on those who had been irregularly appointed in the
past. The fact that the State of Jharkhand continued with
the irregular appointments for almost a decade after the
decision in Umadevi1  is a clear indication that it believes
that it was all right to continue with irregular appoint-
ments, and whenever required, terminate the services of
the irregularly appointed employees on the ground that
they were irregularly appointed. This is nothing but a form
of exploitation of the employees by not giving them the
benefits of regularisation and by placing the sword of
Damocles  over  their  head.  This  is  precisely
what Umadevi1  and Kesari3, sought to avoid.
10.
The decision in Narendra Kumar Tiwari7 has to be understood in the
backdrop of the facts of that case.
11.
The contract employees in the present case cannot, therefore, claim the
relief of regularization in terms of paragraph 53 of the decision in Umadevi1.
The rejection of their petition by the single Judge of the High Court was quite
correct and there was no occasion for the Division Bench to interfere in the
matter.
20
12.
It is true that, as on the day when the judgment in  Umadevi1 was
delivered by this Court, the contract employees had put in just about 3 to 4 years
of service. But, as of now, most of them have completed more than 10 years of
service on contract  basis.  Though the benefit of regularization cannot  be
granted, a window of opportunity must be given to them to compete with the
available talent through public advertisement.  A separate and exclusive test
meant only for the contract employees will not be an answer as that would
confine  the zone of  consideration to contract  employees themselves.   The
modality  suggested  by  the  University,  on  the  other  hand,  will  give  them
adequate chance and benefit to appear in the ensuing selection.  
13.
We, therefore, direct that all the concerned contract employees engaged
by the University be afforded benefits as detailed in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the
affidavit dated 09.03.2021 with following modifications:
(a)
The benefit of age relaxation as contemplated in paragraph 6 of the
affidavit without any qualification must be extended to all the contract
employees.
(b)
In modification of paragraph 7 of the affidavit, those employees
who were engaged in the year 2011 be given the benefit of 10 marks in
the ensuing selection  process  while for  every additional  year  that  a
21
contract employee had put in, benefit of one more mark subject to the
ceiling of 8 additional marks be given.  In other words, if a contract
employee was engaged for the first time in the year 2010, he shall be
entitled to the benefit of 11 marks, while one engaged since 2003 shall be
given 18 marks, as against the appointee of 2011 who will have the
advantage of only 10 marks.  The contract appointees of 2012 and 2013
will have the advantage of 9 and 8 marks respectively.  
(c)
The Public Notice inviting applications from the candidates shall
specifically state that the advantage in terms of the order passed by this
Court would be conferred upon the contract employees so that other
candidates are put to adequate notice.
(d)
All  the  contract  employees  shall  be  entitled  to  offer  their
candidature for the ensuing selection in next four weeks and in order to
give them sufficient time to prepare, the test shall be undertaken only
after three months of the receipt of applications from the candidates.
14.
We  hasten  to  add  that  these  directions  are  premised  on  two  basic
submissions  advanced  by  Mr.  Santosh  Kumar,  learned  advocate  for  the
University that;
(i)
the  total  marks  for  the  test  will  be  300  marks  and  thus  the
22
maximum advantage which a contract employee will have is of 18 marks
which in turn is relatable to advantage of 6% as against other participants
in the selection process;
(ii)
all the contract employees are otherwise entitled and eligible to
participate in the selection process.
15.
In our view, paragraphs 6 & 7 of the affidavit with the modifications as
directed hereinabove will subserve the purpose.  Such directions will not only
afford chance to the contract employees to participate in the selection process
regardless of their age but will also entitle them to some advantage over the other
participants.  Similarly, those contract employees who have put in more number
of years as against the other contract employees, will also have a comparative
advantage.
16.
Lastly, it must be observed that according to Mr. Santosh Kumar, there
are at present 300 Junior Assistants working on contract basis in the University
while the number of posts advertised are only 236.  Even if it be assumed that all
these 236 posts are secured by the contract employees, that would still leave 64
of the contract employees as unsuccessful.
It may therefore possibly be said that as against the required posts of 236,
the University had engaged contract employees in excess of the required number
23
or that there may be further advertisement to fill up the remaining posts.
We need not go into this issue and we rest content by saying that in any
selections in future, one more chance and advantage in terms of this order shall
be given to such unsuccessful contract employees.
17.
With the aforesaid observations, these appeals stand disposed of.  No
costs.
 …...……………………..J.
                                      
             [UDAY UMESH LALIT]  
    
..………………………..J.
                                [K. M. JOSEPH]
New Delhi
March 25, 2021.
