1
    
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL  NO.11856  OF 2018 
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO 10084 OF 2012)
S C SINGH
..APPELLANT 
VERSUS
STATE OF UTTARAKHAND AND ORS
     
..RESPONDENTS 
WITH
CONTEMPT PETITION (C) No 196 of 2014 
IN
CIVIL APPEAL @ SLP(C) No 10084 of 2012
J U D G M E N T
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
1
Leave granted.
2
The appeal in the present case arises from the judgment of a Division Bench
of the High Court of Uttarakhand dated 28 December 20111. The High Court
1 In Writ Petition No 429 of 2006
REPORTABLE
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2018.12.05
17:06:28 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified
2
quashed a Resolution dated 29 July 2006, being Resolution No. 23 of the 76th
General Meeting of the Executive Council of the Second Respondent2. By that
resolution,  the  College  Development  Council3 was  terminated  with  immediate
effect. The Appellant, who was a Director of the CDC, has filed the present appeal,
aggrieved by the direction of the High Court that while the CDC will continue, it will
be without the Appellant as its Director.
3
On  the  request  of  the  Second  Respondent,  the  University  Grants
Commission4  agreed to set up a CDC if an assurance was communicated by the
Government of Uttar Pradesh that it would bear the financial liability after 31 March
1995. By a letter dated 31 October 1991, the Government of Uttar Pradesh agreed
to bear all the expenses incurred on the post of Director, CDC after 31 March
1995. By a letter dated 07 November 1991, the UGC agreed to the request of the
University to set up a CDC with two posts – (i) A Director in the Professor’s scale;
and (ii) A stenographer. An advertisement inviting applications for the above posts
was issued on 06 January 1992. The Appellant was appointed as Director, CDC
through open selection by an office order dated 02 November 1992 of the Second
Respondent. On 23 January 1996, the Appellant was permanently absorbed.  
4
In  2003,  the  University  shifted  the  office  of  the  CDC  from  Srinagar  to
Dehradun. The Appellant filed a writ petition5  before the High Court of Uttarakhand
2 Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar
3 CDC
4 UGC
5 Writ Petition (SB) No 7 of 2006
3
challenging the order of transfer. On 09 December 2005, the University transferred
the Appellant to the Swami Ramtirth Campus, New Tehri. On 30 June 2006,
disciplinary  proceedings  were  initiated  against  the  Appellant  and  he  was
suspended. The order of suspension was stayed on an interim application in the
above  writ  petition,  on  10  July  2006.  On  19  July  2006,  the  High  Court  of
Uttarakhand disposed of the writ petition by revoking the suspension, subject to
the Appellant joining service at Srinagar. However, the disciplinary proceedings
were not stayed. 
5
At the 76th General Meeting of its Executive Council, the University passed a
resolution to abolish the post of CDC on the ground that the permission of the
government for bearing the financial burden of the CDC was not received and it
was not legally created. Challenging this resolution, the Appellant filed a writ
petition6  before the High Court of Uttarakhand, from which the present appeal
arises. The High Court relied on the ‘Revised Guidelines for the Establishment of
College  Development  Council  in  Universities’  issued  by  the  UGC  for  the
establishment of the CDC. Clause 3 of the revised guidelines deals with tenure of
the Director, thus:
“He  may  be  appointed  on  a  tenure  basis  for  three  years,
extendable for another terms of three years, but not beyond the
age of 65 years, when he would retire.”
The High Court observed that the Government of Uttar Pradesh agreed to bear the
expenses to be incurred in respect of the post of Director, CDC. However, the
University  did  not  obtain  reimbursement  from  the  State  Government  for  the
6 Writ Petition No 429 of 2006
4
expenses incurred. Ruling that the University could not hold out that there was no
assurance by the State Government to take over the liability of the CDC after 31
March  1995,  the  High Court  quashed Resolution No. 23 of the  76th General
Meeting of the Executive Council by which the post of the CDC was sought to be
abolished. This ruling of the High Court is not challenged. On the question whether
the Appellant should be allowed to continue as Director, CDC, the High Court
observed that he was admittedly appointed under the scheme envisaged by the
revised guidelines issued by the UGC and could only work for two tenures of three
years. Noting that the Appellant had already served two terms of three years, the
High  Court held  that the  CDC will continue,  but  without the  Appellant as its
Director. It is this direction of the High Court, refusing the Appellant’s continuation
as Director, CDC that forms the basis of the present appeal. The High Court
directed  that  the  University  to  complete  the  adjustment  of  the  Appellant  as
mentioned in Resolution No. 23 of the 76th General Meeting of the Executive
Council. The High Court held that the submission that the term limit in the revised
guidelines applies only to deputationists has no merit since the deputationists are
also people associated with higher education and at the relevant time when the
revised guidelines were issued, the retirement age of persons associated with
higher education would be much less than 65 years. 
6 
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. 
5
7
Mr Vikas Singh, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the
office order dated 02 November 1992 by which the Appellant was appointed as
Director, CDC did not mention that he is being appointed on deputation or on a
tenure basis. The main contention put forth for the Appellant is that applying the
principle of ejusdem generis, the tenure limitation of two terms of three years in
Clause 3 of the revised guidelines can only apply to those Directors appointed on
a deputation basis. It was further contended that once the Appellant was absorbed,
the tenure limitation which applied only to deputationists, did not apply to him. 
8
The learned counsel for the Respondent University submitted on the other
hand that the Appellant was put to notice that his appointment was for a tenure of
three years and that the tenure limitation of two terms of three years applied to the
post of Director, CDC and barred the Appellant from continuing in the post after
having served two terms. 
9
The terms of the advertisement issued on 06 January 1992 by the University
calling for applications for the posts in the newly constituted CDC are material. The
relevant portion reads thus:
“Minimum qualification for Director are same as those for the post
of a Professor as prescribed by the University. Preference will be
given to the candidate who has dealt with academic administration.
The tenure of the Director, College Development Council will
be for 3 years.” (Emphasis supplied)
The Appellant was put to notice that his appointment was for a period of three
years. Though the office order dated 02 November 1992 by which the Appellant
6
was appointed as Director, CDC does not mention a tenure, it cannot be said that
the Appellant was not put to notice that his appointment to the post of Director,
CDC was for a period of three years. The appointment was in terms of the
advertisement.
10
Clause 3 of the revised guidelines reads thus:
“3.  The  Coordinator/Director/Dean  of  the  College  Development
Council  may  be  appointed  by  the  Syndicate  on  the
recommendation  of  the  Selection  Committee  consisting  of  the
Vice-Chancellor,  as  Chairman,  a  nominee  of  the  UGC,  and  a
nominee of the Syndicate of the University. He may be appointed
in the scale of Rs. 1500-2500 plus other admissible allowances as
per university rules. Persons on deputation will be eligible for
deputation  and  other  permissible  allowances.  He may  be
appointed on a tenure basis for three years, extendable for another
term of three years, but not beyond the age of 65 years, when he
would retire.” 
                                                                         (Emphasis supplied)
11
Learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant contended that the sentence that
provides for a tenure follows the sentence that states that “persons on deputation
will be eligible for deputation and other permissible allowances” and hence, the
tenure limitation applies only to those appointed as deputationists. It is submitted
that the word “he” appearing at the beginning of the sentence and after the
sentence permitting the appointment of deputationists must be read together. 
12
There is no merit in this contention. The clause deals with the appointment
of the Coordinator/Director/Dean of the CDC.  When the clause is read as a whole,
the  word  “he”  is  used  to  indicate  the  pay  scale  and  the  tenure  of  the
7
Coordinator/Director/Dean of the CDC. The sentence on deputationists is merely
to  provide  that  those  persons  on  deputation  will  be  eligible  for  deputation
allowance and other permissible allowances. The clause read as a whole, deals
with the conditions for the appointment of the Coordinator/Director/Dean of the
CDC.  Hence, it cannot be held that merely because the sentence providing for a
tenure  limitation  follows  the  sentence  on  deputationists,  the  tenure  limitation
applies only to deputationists. The tenure limitation applies to every person who is
appointed to the post.
13
The Appellant, who was appointed on 02 November 1992, has admittedly
served out the tenure as Director, CDC of two terms of three years each. We are in
agreement with the High Court that having served the tenure laid down by the
revised guidelines, the Appellant cannot continue as Director, CDC. 
14
For these reasons, we see no reason to interfere with the judgment of the
High  Court. The  appeal  shall stand  dismissed.  In view of  the appeal being
dismissed, the contempt petition does not survive. There shall be no order as to
costs.
      ........................................................J
                  [U U Lalit]
                                                   
                                               .......................................................J
                                    
                  [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
New Delhi;
December 05, 2018 
