REPORTABLE
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6753 OF 2019
(Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 19807/2019)
Rohan Virani & Ors.
 
 …Appellants
versus
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
     …Respondents
J U D G M E N T
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
Leave granted. 
1.
The   present   Civil   Appeal   has   been   filed   by   a   batch   of
students   from   University   of   Mumbai   to   challenge   the
Judgement and Order dated 25.07.2019 passed by a division
1
bench of the Bombay High Court in Writ Petition (ST) No.
20304 of 2019.
  
   The issue which arises is with respect to admission to the
Post Graduate courses of MBA/MMS in the Jamnalal Bajaj
Institute of Management Studies (“JBIMS”) for the current
academic year 2019­2020. The contest is based on the issue
whether JBIMS is to be treated as an autonomous or non­
autonomous Department of the University of Mumbai for the
current academic year.
2.
JBIMS   was   established   in   1965   as   a   Department   of   the
University of Mumbai, and is one of the most prestigious and
oldest institutions for management courses in the country.
      It   has   consistently   been   ranked   amongst   the   top   10
business   schools   in   India.   JBIMS   is   well   known   for   its
distinguished   and   professional  faculty   members,   including
representatives from industry and academia.
2.1.
The University of Mumbai vide letter dated 11.07.2014,
granted autonomous status to JBIMS for a period of
five years from the academic year 2014­2015 to 2018­
2019.
   A perusal of the letter dated 11.07.2014, shows that
the   Academic   Council
 vide 
Resolution   dated
07.06.2014,   and   the   Management   Council   of   the
University   of   Mumbai
 vide 
Resolution   dated
2
07.06.2014, resolved to confer autonomous status on
JBIMS.
   The autonomous status was granted for a period of 5
years from the academic year 2014­15 to 2018­19.
2.2.
For the academic years 2014­2015, 2015­2016, 2016­
2017,   and   2017­2018,   admissions   to   the   MBA   and
MMS   Courses   in   JBIMS   was   conducted   as   an
Autonomous   PG   Department   of   the   University   of
Mumbai. 
   
   The autonomy granted to JBIMS from 2014­2015 to
2018­2019 was not challenged by any party.
   
   As a consequence, 85% seats were filled up from all
universities in the State of Maharashtra on the basis of
merit, while 15% were filled up from the all India quota
merit list.
2.3.
As   per   Section   122   (4)   of   the   Maharashtra   Public
Universities
 
Act,
 
2016,
 
Autonomous
Colleges/University Departments may prescribe their
own   courses   of   study,   evolve   their   own   teaching
methods and conduct examinations and tests for their
students, and recommend the award of degrees, and
diplomas   to   the   University   as   per   the   procedure
prescribed in the Statutes.
2.4.
During the academic year 2018­2019, the Directorate
of Technical Education issued a Notification whereby
3
100% seats in JBIMS were allocated to the students
from the State of Maharashtra, and thereby wiped out
the 15% all India quota in entirety. The Bombay High
Court  in  Mayuri  Umesh  Munde  v.  Directorate   of   the
Technical Education & Ors.  [W.P. (L) No. 2342 /2018
decided on 27.07.2018] held the 100% State quota to
be illegal and impermissible.
2.5.
The JBIMS  vide  letter dated 18.02.2019 addressed to
the Directorate of Technical Education, Maharashtra,
informed   the   Directorate   that   JBIMS   was   an
autonomous department of the University of Mumbai.
A decision was taken by the Board of Management on
15.02.2019,   that   JBIMS   would   process   its   own
admission program for the MMS course for the ensuing
academic   year   2019­2020.   The   Directorate   was
requested not to include JBIMS in the CET process,
and further informed that the procedure for admission
and the timelines being followed would be intimated in
due course.
   
   A separate letter dated 18.02.2019 was addressed to
the Admission Regulatory Authority (CET­Cell) to the
same effect.
2.6.
The JBIMS addressed a letter dated 25.05.2019 to the
Vice   Chancellor   of   the   University   of   Mumbai,   for
extension of its autonomous status.
4
   
     Further letters dated 27.06.2019 and 28.06.2019
were written to the Vice Chancellor for extension of
autonomy for the next five­year period.
2.7.
For   the   academic   year   2019­2020,   a   confusion
occurred   about   the   status   of   JBIMS   since   the
autonomous   status   granted   by   the   University   of
Mumbai was for a period of five years i.e. from 2014 to
2019.
2.8.
The Combined Entrance Test, was conducted by the
CET­Cell, Maharashtra, for the current academic year
on   09/10.03.2019.   The   results   were   declared   on
30.03.2019.
2.9.
The State of Maharashtra vide G.R. dated 04.06.2019
followed   by   the   Information   Brochure   dated
29.06.2019, set out the seat matrix for autonomous
institutes,   and   non­autonomous   institutes   and
University Departments as follows :­
Autonomous
       :
85% State Level
Non­Autonomous &         : 
University Department
70% for Home University 
15% for Other Universities
2.10. On 01.07.2019, the Directorate of Technical Education
published   information   on   its   website   showing   the
status   of   JBIMS   as   non­autonomous.  
  As   a
consequence, out of a total of 120 seats in JBIMS, 79
were   to   be   allocated   to   the   Home   University   i.e.
5
University of Mumbai in all categories; 17 seats were to
be allocated to Outside Home Universities (OHU); and
5 seats were to be allocated to Persons with Disabilities
(PWD). The balance 18 seats constituted 15% of the
total number of seats left as the All India Quota.
2.11. JBIMS  vide  letter   dated   09.07.2019,   informed   the
Director   of   Technical   Education,   Maharashtra   that
JBIMS is a department of the University of Mumbai.
The University itself is an autonomous body, and can
grant   autonomy   to   its   own   departments.   The
Application for extension of autonomy had been made
before the Vice Chancellor. The Vice Chancellor of the
University had permitted JBIMS to apply and get the
process   of   extension   of   autonomy   started.   The
extension of autonomy was expected to be received in
due course.
2.12. On 17.07.2019 the CET­Cell, Maharashtra published
the Allotment List for students, including JBIMS. In
CAP Round 1, admissions were done on the basis of
JBIMS being a Non­Autonomous Institute.
2.13. The Appellants herein are students from the University
of Mumbai, who secured admission in JBIMS on the
basis of the Seat Allocation made in CAP Round 1.
2.14. On 18.07.2019, Writ Petition bearing No. 20304/2019
was filed by Respondent Nos. 7 to 15 herein, who are
6
students   from   Other   Universities   in   the   State   of
Maharashtra,   to   challenge   the   admissions   made   to
JBIMS by treating it as a Non­Autonomous Institute. 
     The Writ Petitioners  inter alia  contended that they
had secured higher ranks on merit in the Common
Entrance   Test.     However,   the   admissions   were
conducted   on   the   basis   of   JBIMS   being   a   Non­
Autonomous Institute, and the Writ Petitioners were
not able to secure admission, since 70% of the seats in
JBIMS   were   allocated   to   students   from   the   Home
University i.e. the University of Mumbai. Had JBIMS
been   treated   as   an   Autonomous   Institute   for   the
current   academic   year,   then   85%   seats   would   have
been   filled   up   by   candidates   from   all   universities
across the State on the basis of merit in the Common
Entrance Test.
   The Writ Petitioners inter alia prayed for a direction
to the respondents to initiate and complete the process
of extension of the autonomous status of JBIMS by
following the procedure prescribed under Statutes No.
593 to 642 framed by the University of Mumbai; quash
the Allotment List dated 17.07.2019; grant an interim
injunction to restrain the CET­Cell, Maharashtra from
carrying on with the admission process.
7
2.15. Given the urgency of the matter, a division bench of
the Bombay High Court took up the matter for final
hearing   and   passed   the   impugned   judgment   on
25.07.2019.
 
    It   may   be   noted   that   the   University   Grants
Commission   (“UGC”)   was   not   served,   and   was   not
represented before the High Court.
      The   Appellants   herein   have   raised   a   serious
grievance that even though their names were contained
in   the   Allotment   List   dated   17.07.2019,   they   were
neither impleaded in the Writ Petition, nor was notice
issued to them by the High Court.
2.16. The High Court  vide  Impugned Judgment and Order
dated   25.07.2019,   allowed   the   Writ   Petition,   and
directed that the admissions process be re­conducted
by treating JBIMS as an Autonomous Institute.
   The High Court recorded in para 42 of the impugned
judgment that the Advocate General for Maharashtra
did not dispute that the University of Mumbai had the
power to confer autonomous status on JBIMS. As per
Section   122   of   the   Maharashtra   Public   Universities
Act,   2016,   a   University   Department   or   Institution,
affiliated college, or recognized institution could apply
to   the   University   for   grant   of   autonomous   status.
8
Autonomy was not granted by the State Government,
but by the University.
   
   The High Court further held that JBIMS continued to
be an Autonomous Institute, since its Application for
extension of   autonomy  was   pending  approval  before
the University. The Vice Chancellor of the University
had permitted JBIMS to apply for extension, and get
the process commenced.  As a consequence, the status
of autonomy of JBIMS was neither surrendered, nor
was it revoked.
   
     In this backdrop, the State Government and the
Directorate   of   Technical   Education   could   not   have
proceeded on the premise that the autonomous status
of   JBIMS   had   automatically   come   to   an   end   on
11.07.2019. The presumption of the State that JBIMS
is   a   Non­Autonomous   Institute   was   held   to   be
unsustainable.
   The High Court further held that the status of JBIMS
remained unaltered, and that JBIMS had not lost its
autonomy.   In   these   circumstances,   the   modification
brought   about   by   the   Directorate   of   Technical
Education by showing the status of JBIMS as non­
autonomous was set aside.
   It was directed that the entire admissions process be
re­conducted   by   treating   JBIMS   as   an   Autonomous
Institute. 
9
3.
The Appellants herein are 39 students who filed the Special
Leave   Petition   against   the   aforesaid   Judgment   dated
25.07.2019 seeking special leave to appeal, since they were
not impleaded before the High Court. These Appellants come
from the University of Mumbai, and are seeking admission on
the basis of JBIMS being a non­autonomous Institute. 
      On   14.08.2019,   this   Court   issued   Notice   to   all   the
Respondents, and directed that status quo be maintained in
the meanwhile. The matter was posted for final hearing on
28.08.2019.
4.
The matter was taken up for final hearing on 28.08.2019.
The Appellant­Students were represented by Mr. C.U. Singh,
Sr. Adv., the State of Maharashtra was represented by Mr.
Prasenjit Keswani, Adv., the Respondent­Students [original
Writ Petitioners] were represented by Mr. S.B. Talekar, Adv.,
the University of Mumbai and JBIMS were represented by
Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Adv., and the UGC was represented by
Mr. Apoorv Kurup, Adv.
     The  Court appointed  Mr. Maninder  Singh,  Sr. Adv. to
appear as amicus curiae and assist the Court.
5.
We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   all   the   parties,
perused the material on record, and the written submissions
filed by all the parties, including the learned amicus curiae. 
10
6.
It   was   submitted  inter   alia  on   behalf   of   the   Appellant­
Students that :­
6.1.
The   impugned   judgment   has   been   passed   after   the
Appellants had obtained admission. The Allotment List
was published on 17.07.2019 i.e. prior to the filing of
the Writ Petition. Hence, there was no justification for
not impleading them in the Writ Petition, even though
they were most vitally affected by the outcome of the
proceedings. The impugned judgment being  ex parte
qua  them, was liable to be set aside on this ground
alone.
6.2.
The impugned judgment was passed without issuing
Notice to the UGC, even though it was joined as a party
respondent in the Writ Petition. Representation by the
UGC was necessary to determine the issues raised in
the Writ Petition, since it is the case of the Appellants
that concurrence of the UGC was mandatory for grant
of autonomous status. 
   The High Court decided the case with undue haste,
without granting a hearing to the necessary parties i.e.
the   Appellant­Students   who   had   already   secured
admission, and the UGC.
11
6.3.
The   autonomous   status   conferred   by   the   University
was invalid, since the procedure prescribed by law had
not   been   fulfilled.   The   University   Statutes   apply   to
colleges   as   well   as   university   departments.   Statutes
No. 593 to 642 passed by the Senate of the University
of Mumbai in its Special Meeting held on 04.12.2001
pertain   to   grant   of   autonomous   status   to   Affiliated
College/University Department/University Institution.
6.4.
The Appellants submitted that the Statutes No. 593 to
642   of   the   University   of   Mumbai   for   grant   of
autonomous   status   to   Affiliated   College/Recognized
Institution/University
 
Department/University
Institution,   passed   by   the   Senate   on   04.12.2001,
would be applicable to JBIMS as well.
      As   per   Statute   No.   595,   the   College/Recognized
Institution/University
 
Department/University
Institution desirous of having autonomous status shall
apply to the Registrar of the University.
     The Board of College and University Department
should   constitute   a   Committee   to   scrutinize   the
Applications   received.   The   Report   of   the   Scrutiny
Committee   shall   be   placed   before   the   Board   for   its
consideration.   After   careful   consideration   of   the
Report, the Board shall recommend the case of such
College/Recognized
 
Institution/University
12
Department/University   Institution   to   the   Academic
Council for its consideration.
   As per Statute No. 597, the Academic Council, after
considering   the   recommendations   of   the   Board   of
College and University Department shall constitute the
Local Inquiry Committee, which would comprise of a
five­member committee, including one nominee of the
UGC.
    The Report of the Local Inquiry Committee shall be
placed   before   the   Academic   Council   for   its
consideration.   After   careful   consideration   of   the
Report,   the   Academic   Council   shall   recommend   the
same to the Management Council.
    The Management Council shall consider the Report
of   the   Local   Inquiry   Committee,   and   the
recommendations   of   the   Academic   Council,   and
thereafter take its decision whether autonomous status
be   conferred   on   the   applicant   College/Recognized
Institution/University
 
Department/University
Institution, or whether the Application be rejected.
    The Statutes of the University of Mumbai require a
recommendation   from   the   State   Government;   the
concurrence   from   the   UGC;   and   publication   of   a
Notification by the University of Mumbai notifying the
conferment of autonomous status.
13
    
      However,   none   of   these   requirements   had   been
fulfilled in the present case. This would be apparent
from   the   fact   that   JBIMS   was   not   included   in   the
Annual List of Autonomous Colleges published by the
UGC.
6.5.
JBIMS   was   granted   autonomy   for   a   period   of   five
academic   years   from   2014­15   to   2018­19   by   the
University.   Hence,   even   if   it   is   assumed   that   the
autonomous status of JBIMS was validly granted in
2014, it was certainly not applicable for the academic
year 2019­20.
6.6.
It was further submitted that there is no provision for a
deemed   extension   of   the   autonomous   status   of   an
institute. Regulation 7.10 of the 2018 UGC Regulations
will   apply   only   if   an   Application   in   the   prescribed
format under Regulation 7.8, has been made to the
UGC,   at   least   6   months   prior   to   the   expiry   of   the
autonomy cycle.
6.7.
The   Maharashtra   Unaided   Private   Professional
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admissions to
Full   Time   Professional   Undergraduate   Technical
Courses) Rules, 2017 were made specifically applicable
to,   and   adopted   for   Government   aided/non­aided
institutions   and   University   Departments  vide  G.R.
dated 25.04.2017.
14
      The   G.R.   dated   25.04.2017   prescribed   the   seat
matrix   for   admissions,   which   was   further   amended
vide the G.R. dated 04.06.2019.
6.8.
It was submitted that even if there was some ambiguity
with   regard   to   the   definitions   of   “Autonomous
Institutes”   and   “Non­Autonomous   Institutes”   for   the
applicability   of   this   statutory   regime   to   JBIMS,   the
Information Brochure dated 29.06.2019 put all doubts
to rest, and conclusively answered this issue.
      The   Information   Brochure   dated   29.06.2019   is
admittedly the document on the basis of which both
the Writ Petitioners (Respondent Nos. 7 to 15 herein)
and the present Appellants have applied for admission.
   The said Information Brochure sets out the manner
in which the Admissions Act, 2015 and the Rules of
2017 are to be applied. It sets out the definition of an
“Autonomous  Institution”  as an  institution to  which
autonomy is granted by the UGC.
      The  Writ  Petitioners  have   neither  challenged   the
Information Brochure, nor the G.R. dated 25.04.2017.
6.9.
It was further submitted that even if it is conceded that
JBIMS can be treated as a University Department, for
which   the   concurrence   of   the   UGC   is   not   required,
even   then   the   seat   matrix   applicable   to   JBIMS   will
remain the same, since the seat matrix applicable to a
15
non­autonomous   institution   and   a   university
department is the same.
7.
The stand taken by the State of Maharashtra was similar to
that of the Appellants.
7.1.
It was submitted that the concurrence of the UGC is
mandatory   for   grant   of   autonomous   status   to   an
educational institution.
7.2.
It   was   further   submitted   that   the   Directorate   of
Technical Education vide letter dated 19.01.2019 had
informed JBIMS that it is not included in the list of
autonomous colleges published by the UGC.
     JBIMS was asked to furnish proof of having been
granted autonomy after the concurrence of the UGC,
but JBIMS failed to do so.
7.3.
It was further submitted that if the admissions process
is re­conducted by treating JBIMS as an autonomous
institute, then it will lead to complications in the entire
admissions process throughout the State.
8.
The Respondent – Students, JBIMS, and the University of
Mumbai took the same stand that admissions to the current
academic year 2019­2020 ought to be carried out on the
basis   that   JBIMS   is   an   Autonomous   Department   of   the
University of Mumbai.
16
8.1.
It   was   submitted   that   JBIMS   is   admittedly   a
Department   of   the   University   of   Mumbai.   Since   the
University of Mumbai itself is autonomous, it does not
require   the   concurrence   of   the   UGC   for   granting
autonomous status to one of its own Departments. 
8.2.
The   source   of   its   autonomy   was   on   the   basis   of
conferment by the University of Mumbai, which was
granted vide letter dated 11.07.2014 bearing Reference
No. APD/523/169/2014. The autonomy was granted
pursuant to the Resolution dated 07.06.2014 passed
by   the   Academic  Council,  and   the   Resolution  dated
07.07.2014 passed by the Management Council. The
decision   of   the   University   of   Mumbai   to   confer
autonomous status to JBIMS was not challenged by
any party.
8.3.
It   was   further   submitted   that   the   UGC   Regulations
published   on   12.02.2018   are   applicable   only   to
Colleges   and   Affiliated   Institutes,   and   have   no
application to University Departments, such as JBIMS.
8.4.
It was further submitted that 3 other Departments of
the University of Mumbai viz. Physics, Chemistry, and
Economics   were   granted   autonomous   status   by   the
University   almost   a   decade   ago.   Their   autonomous
status   is   continuing   till   date,   and   has   never   been
17
questioned   either   by   the   State   Government,   or   the
UGC.
8.5.
It was further submitted that the List of Autonomous
Colleges published by the UGC annually, includes only
Colleges, and  not University Departments. The  non­
inclusion   of   JBIMS   from   the   said   list   has   no
significance.
8.6.
The   autonomous   status   of   JBIMS   granted   on
11.07.2014 till 2019, has neither been surrendered,
nor revoked. 
      Pursuant  to  the   permission  granted   by   the   Vice
Chancellor to apply, and get the process of autonomy
started,   JBIMS   has   submitted   its   Application.   The
Application   is   under   active   consideration   of   the
University. 
9.
The UGC was represented by counsel before this Court, and
filed detailed written submissions before the Court. It was
submitted that :­
9.1.
The   UGC   had   initially   made   “Guidelines   for
Autonomous   Colleges   during   the   XIIth  Plan   Period
(2012 – 2017)” which in para 3 had made it clear that
only “Colleges” were eligible to apply for autonomous
status.
18
9.2.
These guidelines were replaced by the “UGC Guidelines
for   Autonomous   Colleges,   2017”   which   also   were
applicable   only   to   “Colleges”.   Clause   6   of   the   2017
Guidelines provides the condition of eligibility, wherein
it is stated that: 
“All Colleges (of any discipline) under Section 2(f) of
the   UGC   Act   whether   aided,   partially   aided   and
unaided/self­financing   are   eligible   to   apply   for
autonomous status.”
9.3.
The UGC promulgated the 2018 Regulations which in
Regulation 1.2, state that:
“These
 
Regulations
 
shall
 
apply
 
to
 
all
Colleges/Institutions which are affiliated to, or are
constituent   colleges   of   Universities   in   the   country
seeking   the   conferment   of   Autonomous   College
Status.”
   Regulation 6 states as follows :
“Colleges (of any discipline) whether aided, partially
aided   and   unaided/self­financing   are   eligible
provided they are under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act.”
Upon   grant   of   Autonomous   College   Status,   the
concerned   institution   would   be   entitled   to   the
benefits stipulated in Regulation 3.
    The term “College” which is defined in Regulation
2.4, cannot be interpreted to include a “Department”
of the Parent University, since a “Parent University”
is defined under Regulation 2.9 as follows :
19
“The University to which the college concerned is
affiliated, or of  which the college concerned  is  a
constituent.”
   A Department of the University is neither affiliated to,
nor   a   constituent   of   that   University,   and   it   is   not
required to apply to the UGC for autonomous status in
terms   of   the   University’s   Statutes,   since   Universities
are   by   their   very   nature,   autonomous/independent
institutions of higher education.
9.4.
The 2018 Regulations are applicable only to Colleges to
apply for autonomous status.
9.5.
The   UGC   expressly   took   the   view   that   JBIMS   is
admittedly   neither   an   affiliated   college,   nor   a
constituent college, but a Department of the University
of Mumbai. A Department of the University of Mumbai
is not required to apply for autonomous status under
the UGC Regulations.
   It was further submitted that JBIMS is a Department
of the University of  Mumbai, and is not required to
apply   for   autonomous   status   under   the   UGC
Regulations.   For   grant   of   autonomous   status   to   a
Department   of   the   University,   Section   122   of   the
Maharashtra   Public   Universities   Act,   2016   provides
that   the   University   Department   may   apply   to   the
University   for   grant   of   autonomous   status.   The
20
Management   Council   on   the   recommendation   of   the
Academic Council may confer the autonomous status.
   The Maharashtra Public Universities Act, 2016 itself
makes   a   distinction   between   a   “College”   and   a
“Department”. 
10. Mr. Maninder Singh, Sr. Adv., the learned amicus curiae inter
alia submitted that :­
10.1. The   autonomy   envisaged   under   Section   2(5)   of   the
Maharashtra   Public   Universities   Act,   2016   is
completely   different   from   the   autonomy   envisaged
under the Regulations framed by the UGC.
    The UGC (Conferment of Autonomous Status upon
Colleges and Measures for Maintenance of Standards
in   Autonomous   Colleges)   Regulations,   2018   (“2018
UGC Regulations”) are applicable only to colleges, and
not to Departments of the University. This would be
evident   from   the   various   clauses   in   the   2018   UGC
Regulations. The Preamble to the Regulations states
that the Regulations have been promulgating college
autonomy. Clause 1.2. of the Regulations states that
the Regulations shall apply to all Colleges/ Institutions
which are affiliated to, or are constituent colleges of
Universities   in   the   country   seeking   conferment   of
Autonomous College status.
21
     The definition of “College” under Clause 2.4 of the
2018 UGC Regulations, when read with the definition
of   “Parent   University”   under   Clause   2.9,   makes   it
abundantly clear that the 2018 UGC Regulations apply
only  to affiliated  or constituent  colleges, and  not to
University Departments.
     The phrase “autonomous college” is employed in
other provisions of the 2018 UGC Regulations, such as
in Clauses 2.1, 2.3, 2.6 and 2.7. The privileges granted
to an autonomous college are covered by Clause 3 of
the Regulations. Throughout the Regulations, reference
is   made   to   an   “autonomous   college”,   and   not   to   a
University Department.
   Clause 6 of the 2018 UGC Regulations contains the
eligibility clause, which refers only to colleges, whether
aided,   partially   aided,   or   un­aided/self­financing,
provided they fall under Section 2 (f) of the UGC Act.
   It was therefore, submitted that since JBIMS was not
a   College,   nor   an   Institution   affiliated   to,   nor   a
constituent   of   the   University,   the   2018   UGC
Regulations were not applicable to it.
      The   2018   UGC   Regulations   cannot   be   made
applicable   to   University   Departments,   since   the
University   itself   is   independent/autonomous   in   its
functioning,   and   therefore   there   is   nothing   that
22
prohibits a University from granting autonomy to one
of its own Departments.
10.2. It   was   further   submitted   that   the   G.R.   dated
04.06.2019,   when   it   uses   the   word   “Autonomous”
would mean the status of autonomy granted by the
University   of   Mumbai   under   the   1994   Act,   and
thereafter the 2016 Act.
10.3. Admission to prestigious educational institutions such
as   JBIMS   must   be   granted   on   merit.   If   JBIMS   is
treated as a non­autonomous institute, and 70% of the
seats   are   reserved   for   the   Home   University,   then   it
would vitiate the principle of supremacy of merit.
      On   the   other   hand,   if   JBIMS   is   treated   as   an
autonomous institute, 85% of the seats would be open
for meritorious  students  from  all universities  in  the
State of Maharashtra.
11.
We have carefully perused the written submissions made
by all the parties, and heard the oral submissions made by
their   respective   counsel,   including   the   learned  amicus
curiae. 
11.1. The admitted position is that JBIMS is a Department of
the   University   of   Mumbai,   and   was   granted
autonomous status by the University itself. JBIMS is
23
not an affiliated college, nor a constituent college of the
University.
      This   position   has   been   accepted   by   all   parties,
including   the   State.   In   para   23   of   the   impugned
judgment, the High Court has recorded the submission
of the Advocate General for the State of Maharashtra
about the status of JBIMS as follows :­
“23….Then, Mr. Kumbhakoni was at pains to tell us
about the status of JBIMS. He would submit that we
must   not   forget   that   JBIMS   is   a   department   of
University.   The   University   has   appointed   the   staff
and   the   University   has   sanctioned   the   budget   of
JBIMS. It is not an affiliated college, but a college
conducted   by   the   University.   It   is   not   even   a
constituent   college.  Mr.   Kumbhakoni   would   submit
that the autonomy in this case is not granted by the
UGC, but by the University of Mumbai….”
(emphasis supplied)
      As   per   the   University   of   Mumbai   and   JBIMS,
autonomy   was   conferred   by   the   University   in
accordance   with   the   provisions   of   Maharashtra
University Act, 1994. 
11.2. The UGC in its detailed written and oral submissions
has expressly stated that JBIMS being a Department of
the University of Mumbai, was not required to apply for
autonomous status under the UGC 2018 Regulations.
The   2018   Regulations   were   applicable   to   Colleges/
Institutions   affiliated   to   Universities   in   the   country
seeking conferment of “Autonomous College Status”.
24
     It was submitted that JBIMS is not an affiliated
college, nor a constituent college, but a department of
the University of Mumbai. The approval of the UGC is
not required if a University Department applies to the
University,   for   grant   of   autonomous   status   under
Section   122   of   the   Maharashtra   Public   Universities
Act, 2016.
11.3. JBIMS   had   informed   the   Directorate   of   Technical
Education vide letter dated 18.02.2019 that pursuant
to the decision taken in the meeting of the Board of
Management held on 15.02.2019, it was finalizing the
admission   procedure   for   the   MMS   course   for   the
academic   year   2019­2020.   It   was   requested   that
JBIMS should not be included in the CET process.   
 
    JBIMS   informed   the   Directorate   of   Technical
Education   that   since   it   was   a   Department   of   the
University of Mumbai, it was awaiting to receive the
extension of its autonomous status from the University
of Mumbai.
11.4. The   autonomous   status   conferred   on   JBIMS   was
granted with effect from 11.07.2014 to 11.07.2019. It
was during the subsistence of the autonomous status,
that the Directorate of Technical Education and the
CET­Cell   on   01.07.2019,   had   shown   the   status   of
JBIMS to be non­autonomous.
25
      As   a   consequence,   the   entire   seat   matrix   for
admission   to   the   post­graduate   courses   in   JBIMS
underwent a complete change. As per the seat matrix
published, 70% seats would now be allocated to the
University   of   Mumbai,   to   the   exclusion   of   all   other
universities   in   the   State   of   Maharashtra.   The
remaining 15% to other Universities; and the balance
15% for the All­India Quota.
    In the aforesaid circumstances, since the application
for extension was under consideration, the Directorate
of   Technical   Education   and   the   CET­Cell   were   not
justified   in   treating   JBIMS   as   a   Non­Autonomous
Institute for the current academic year 2019­20. 
11.5. It is the admitted position that the autonomous status
granted   to   JBIMS   has   not   been   revoked,   or
surrendered. 
     The application for extension was made by JBIMS
pursuant   to   the   permission   granted   by   the   Vice
Chancellor   of   the   University   of   Mumbai.     The
application for extension is stated to be under active
consideration.
     Since JBIMS had continued to fulfill the eligibility
criteria   for   extension/renewal   of   the   autonomous
status, it is only a ministerial act which is required to
be   carried   out   by   the   University   to   issue   the
26
Notification   for   grant   of   extension/renewal   of   the
autonomous status.
11.6.   It is relevant to note that even during the previous
academic   year   i.e.   2018­19,   the   Directorate   of
Technical   Education   had   issued   a   Notification,
whereby   it   amended   the   Information   Brochure,   and
allocated   100%   seats   in   JBIMS   to   the   Maharashtra
State quota.
   This Notification came to be challenged by a student
from the All India Quota in the case of Mayuri Umesh
Munde  v.  Directorate   of   Technical   Education   &   Ors.
(supra), wherein the Bombay High Court held that the
100%   reservation   in   favour   of   candidates   from   the
State was illegal and impermissible. The High Court
noted   that   during   the   preceding   years,   the   State   of
Maharashtra had consistently allocated 85% seats in
Autonomous   Institutes   to   candidates   from   all
Universities   in   the   State   of   Maharashtra,   and   15%
seats to candidates from the All India Quota. 
     The High Court held that JBIMS being a premier
institution, and one of the top management colleges in
the country, was being deprived of bright meritorious
students from all over the country. This was a great
national loss, and would undermine the status of an
institution of national stature.
27
    This judgment was not challenged any further, and
attained finality.
11.7. A perusal of the provisions of the Maharashtra Public
Universities Act, 2016 provide the procedure for grant
of autonomous status to departments of a University. 
    Section 2(5) of the Maharashtra Public Universities
Act, 2016 defines “autonomy” as follows :­
“2. (5) “autonomy” means a privilege of the university
conferred   by   the   Statutes   to   permit   a   college,
institution   or   a   university   department   to   conduct
academic   programmes   and   examinations,   develop
syllabus   for   the   respective   subjects   and   issue
certificates of passing the examinations;”
       Section 122 of this Act provides that a University
Department, institution, affiliated college, or recognized
institution   may   apply   to   the   University   for   grant   of
autonomous status. As per sub­section (1) of Section
122, the Management Council, on the recommendation
of the Academic Council, may confer the autonomous
status.
   
    
Section 122 reads as follows: ­
“122.   (1)  A   university   department   or   institution,
affiliated college or recognized institution may apply
to the university for grant of autonomous status. The
Management Council on the recommendation of the
Academic Council may confer the autonomous status.
(2)  Autonomous university department  or institution
or   affiliated   college   or   recognized   institution  shall
28
function with the objectives  of  promoting academic
freedom and scholarship on the part of teachers and
students   which   are   essential   to   the   fostering   and
development of an intellectual climate conducive to
the pursuit of scholarship and excellence.
(3)   The   autonomous   university   department   or
institution   or   affiliated   college   or   recognized
institution,   may  constitute   its   authorities   or  bodies
and exercise the powers and perform the functions
and carry out the administrative, academic and other
activities of the university, as may be prescribed by
the Statutes. 
(4)
 The   autonomous   university   department 
or
institution   or   affiliated   college   or   recognized
institution  may prescribe its own courses of study,
evolve   its   own   teaching   methods   and   hold
examinations   and   tests   for   students   receiving
instruction in it, and recommend the university for
award   degrees,   diplomas   or   certificates,   after
following the procedure as prescribed in the Statutes.
The autonomous university department or institution
or   affiliated   college   or   recognized   institution   shall
have   full   academic   and   administrative   autonomy
subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes and
the   guidelines   issued   by   the   University   Grant
Commission, from time to time.”
(emphasis supplied)
     The  aforesaid  provisions  of  the  2016  Act clearly
indicate that it is the University which is empowered to
grant autonomous status to its Departments. 
    Statute 604 of the University of Mumbai empowers
the University to grant autonomous status initially for
a period of 5 years, and then to extend it for a further
period of 5 years, subject to the procedure prescribed
in Statutes 598 and 600.
29
    The Application for extension of autonomous status
has accordingly been made by JBIMS as a Department
of   the   University,   which   is   pending   consideration
before the University. 
12. The   decision   of   JBIMS   to   apply   for   extension   of   its
autonomous status was taken by its Board of Management
on 15.02.2019, well before the admissions process for the
MMS Course commenced for the academic year 2019­2020.
Accordingly,   the   Directorate   of   Technical   Education   was
requested not to include JBIMS in the said process. JBIMS
after some delay, had addressed a letter dated 25.05.2019 to
the   Vice   Chancellor   of   the   University   for   extension   of   its
autonomous status, which was followed up by letters dated
27.06.2019 and 28.06.2019. We observe that there was some
delay on the part of JBIMS and the University, to process the
Application for extension which led to uncertainty regarding
its continued Autonomous Status.  
      We   however   feel   that   meritorious   students   who   have
secured higher marks in the CET Examination should not be
denied admission, in view of the uncertainty which occurred.
In   our   opinion,   it   would   be   unjust   and   unfair   to   the
meritorious   Respondent­Students.   Admittedly,   JBIMS   has
enjoyed   autonomous   status   for   the   last  5   years,   whereby
Home University students and students from the State of
Maharashtra being covered by the 85% State quota, had an
30
equal opportunity to compete for admission. It would harm
JBIMS   as   an   institution   of   national   repute,   and   cause
disillusionment   and   resentment   amongst   the   meritorious
students, if the admissions are not made on the basis of
merit in the CET. Accordingly, we direct that for the current
academic year 2019­2020, admissions would be made as per
the Judgment of the High Court.
13. The Directorate of Technical Education and the CET­Cell are
hereby   directed   to   conduct   the   admissions   process   in
accordance with the ranking of the students as per the Merit
List   published   by   CET­Cell,   by   treating   JBIMS   as   an
Autonomous Department of the University of Mumbai.
   It is therefore directed that the online admissions process
be carried out within a period of 2 weeks from the date of the
present   Order.   The   candidates   may   be   granted   1   week
thereafter   to   take   admission   in   the   respective   colleges
thereafter.
14. Keeping in  view the  various  issues  which have  arisen  for
consideration,   and   since   the   Writ   Petition   was   decided
without calling for counter affidavits, we deem it appropriate
to remit the matter to the High Court for determination of the
issues of law pertaining to applicability of the 2016 Act, and
the   2018   UGC   Regulations.   Since   these   issues   were   not
specifically raised before the High Court, and the UGC was
31
not represented, it would be appropriate for the High Court
to consider these issues.
   We clarify that we have not expressed any opinion on the
merits of the matter. The findings rendered by us are of a
prima facie  nature, in order to ensure that the admissions
process for the current academic year 2019­2020 does not
get stalled any further.
15. We extend our gratitude to Mr. Maninder Singh, Sr. Adv. who
very   ably   assisted   this   Court   as  amicus   curiae  on   short
notice.
The Civil Appeal is accordingly disposed of.
All pending Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of.
Ordered accordingly.
.......................................J.
(INDU MALHOTRA)
...…...............………………J.
(SANJIV KHANNA)
September 02, 2019
New Delhi
32
