1 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
 
 
 
  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 364 OF 2005 
All India Council for Technical Education      …. Appellant 
   
 
 
 
     Versus 
Shri Prince Shivaji Maratha Boarding 
House’s College of Architecture & Ors.        …. Respondents 
 
WITH 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8506 OF 2019 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 5400/2011) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8507 OF 2019 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 8443/2011) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8511 OF 2019 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 20460/2011) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8509 OF 2019 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 17006/2016) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8508 OF 2019 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 17005/2016) 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8510 OF 2019 
(Arising out of SLP(C) No. 28121/2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
J U D G M E N T 
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J. 
         Delay condoned in SLP(C)No.17005 of 2016 and 
SLP(C)No.17006 of 2016. Leave is granted in all the six 
petitions for special leave to appeal. 
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2019.11.10
20:55:43 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified
2 
 
2. 
This set of appeals mainly involves the question as 
to whether the mandate of the Council of Architecture 
(CoA) or that of the All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) would prevail on the question of 
granting approval and related matters to an institution 
for conducting architectural education course, if there is 
any contradiction in the opinions of these two bodies. 
Both of them are regulatory bodies constituted by 
Parliamentary legislations having power to approve or 
recognize and thereafter monitor working of such an 
institution. 
 
3. 
The CoA owes its origin to the provisions of Section 
3 of the Architects Act, 1972 (the 1972 Act).  AICTE has 
also been constituted under the provisions of Section 3 of 
the All India Council of Technical Education Act, 1987 
(the 1987 Act). As the preambles of these two statutes 
suggest, the former has been enacted to provide for 
registration of Architects and for matters connected 
therewith. The object of the latter statute is to provide for 
a Council with a view to proper planning and coordinated 
development 
of 
the 
technical 
education 
system 
throughout the country, promotion of qualitative 
3 
 
improvements of such education in relation to planned 
quantitative growth and the regulation and proper 
maintenance of norms and standards in the technical 
education system and for matters connected therewith. 
Section 2(g) of the 1987 Act stipulates:- 
“technical 
education” 
means 
programmes 
of 
education, research and training in engineering 
technology, 
architecture, 
town 
planning, 
management, pharmacy and applied arts and crafts 
and such other programme or areas as the central 
government may, in consultation with the Council, 
by notification in the official Gazette, declare;” 
 
4. 
Though the preamble of the 1972 Act projects the 
aim of the legislation to provide for registration of 
architects, this statute also deals with educational aspects 
of a course in architecture. Duties of CoA under the 1972 
Act 
includes 
undertaking 
steps 
for 
recognizing 
qualifications for the purposes of the said Act. Such 
recognition, as, contemplated by the Act, is at two levels. 
There is a schedule to the Act which lists diplomas and 
degrees awarded by named Indian and foreign institutes 
or bodies.  Section 14 of the 1972 Act describes them as 
authorities. These degrees and diplomas are recognized 
qualifications under the said statute. There is also 
provision for amendment of the schedule, so as to 
incorporate therein architectural qualification granted by 
4 
 
any authority in India. The CoA under the said Act however 
has not been conferred with the power to directly recognise 
the architectural qualification. The Central government is 
the authority to undertake that exercise. CoA under the 
1972 statute is a consulting body. The effect of recognition 
by the Central Government is that such recognised 
qualification shall be sufficient for enrollment in the 
register of architects maintained under the said Act. After 
such registration, a person can claim to be an architect 
under the law.  Section 25 of the 1972 Act prescribes three 
modes for entry into the register, the main one being 
holding a recognised qualification. Sub-clause (b) of the 
said provision preserves the right of practising architects 
at the time of initial preparation of the register.  The said 
sub-clause is not relevant so far the subject-controversy is 
involved.  Section 25 (c) prescribes as a condition for 
entering one’s name in the register, possession of such 
other qualifications as may be prescribed by the Rules.  
But no such Rule providing for any additional qualification 
has been brought to our notice by the learned counsel 
appearing for the parties. 
5 
 
5. 
On the question of qualification of architects, 
Section 2 (d) of the 1972 Act defines “recognised 
qualification” to mean any qualification in architecture for 
the time being included in the Schedule or notified under 
Section 15 thereof. The lis in this set of appeals does not 
relate to the provisions of Section 15 of the 1972 Act, which 
is in respect of qualification from a foreign educational 
body.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
 The 
expression 
“approval”, 
however, 
is 
not 
employed in the 1972 Act.  This Act deals with recognition 
of qualification in architecture. Section 14 of the 1972 Act 
stipulates: - 
“14.   Recognition of qualifications granted by        
authorities in India.— (1)  The  qualifications                    
included  in the Schedule or notified under Section 
15 shall be recognised qualifications for the                       
purposes of this Act. 
(2) Any authority in India which grants an                
architectural qualification not included in the 
Schedule may apply to the  Central Government to 
have such qualification recognised, and the Central 
Government, after consultation with the Council, 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule so as to include such qualification 
therein, and any such notification may also direct 
that an entry shall be made in the Schedule against 
such architectural qualification declaring that it 
shall be a recognised qualification only when 
granted after a specified date: 
Provided 
that 
until 
the 
first 
Council 
is                   
constituted, the Central Government shall, before                 
6 
 
issuing any notification as aforesaid, consult an                
Expert Committee consisting of three members to be 
appointed by the Central Government by notification 
in the Official Gazette.” 
 
7.    The power to amend the schedule is vested with the 
Central Government under Section 16 of the 1972 Act. This 
provision reads:- 
 
“16. Power of Central Government to amend 
Schedule.—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (2) of Section 14, the Central Government, 
after consultation with the Council, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend the 
Schedule by directing that an entry be made therein 
in respect of any architectural qualification.” 
 
8.     So far as the 1987 Act is concerned, Section 10 thereof, 
inter-alia, specifies: - 
“POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL 
10. It shall be the duty of the Council to take all 
such steps as it may think fit for ensuring coor-
dinated and integrated development of    tech-
nical education and maintenance of standards 
and for the purposes of performing its functions 
under this Act, the Council may:- 
  
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(i) lay down norms and standards for courses, 
curricula, physical and instructional facilities, 
staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instruc-
tions, assessment and         examinations; 
(j) fix norms and guidelines for charging tuition 
and other fees; 
(k) grant approval for starting new technical in-
stitutions and for introduction of new courses or 
7 
 
programmes in consultation with the agencies 
concerned; 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(m) lay down norms for granting autonomy to 
technical institutions; 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
xxx 
 
(o) provide guidelines for admission of students 
to 
technical 
institutions 
and 
Universities                 
imparting  technical education; 
(p) inspect or cause to inspect any technical in-
stitution; 
(q) withhold or discontinue grants in respect of 
courses, programmes to such technical institu-
tions which fail to comply with the directions 
given by the Council within the stipulated period 
of time and take such other steps as may be nec-
essary for ensuring compliance of the directions 
of the Council;” 
 
9. 
In this judgment, altogether seven appeals shall be 
dealt with, all of which involve the dispute outlined in the 
first paragraph. The main appeal which has been argued 
before us in detail is Civil Appeal No.364 of 2005. The 
appellant in this proceeding is AICTE and its appeal is 
against the judgment of a Division Bench of the Bombay 
High Court delivered on 8th September 2004 in Writ 
Petition No.5942 of 2004. Dispute in this matter pertains 
to intake capacity of an institution by the name of Shri 
Prince Shivaji Maratha Boarding House’s College of 
Architecture. The CoA, on carrying out inspection of the 
college in the year 2004 chose to restore the intake 
8 
 
capacity of 40 students per year which was reduced to 30 
students for two earlier academic years, 2003-2004 and 
2004-2005. Such reduced intake capacity was based on a 
joint inspection undertaken by CoA and AICTE on 25th 
April 2003.  The CoA had decided to restore the intake 
capacity to 40 students by a communication on 18th May 
2004 upon being satisfied with a compliance report filed 
by the institution followed by inspection.  For the 
Academic Year 2004-05 the Director of Technical 
Education, however, fixed the intake capacity of 30 
students in respect of same institution on the basis of 
norms and standards fixed by the AICTE. Questioning 
legality of such action, the institution and the trust which 
ran the latter, brought an action under Article 226 of the 
Constitution of India before the High Court.  The Bench of 
the High Court framed the question for adjudication in the 
following terms: 
“3…..whether the All India Council of Technical 
Education Act, 1987 (for short, ‘AICTE Act’ ) 
overrides the provisions of the Architects Act, 
1972 in the matter of prescribing and regulating 
norms 
and 
standards 
of 
architectural 
institutions. In other words, whether the AICTE 
Act which is a later Act has impliedly repealed 
the provisions of the Architects Act…..” 
 
9 
 
10. 
The Bench of the Bombay High Court found, on 
examination of the scheme of both the statutes that the 
1972 Act was specially designed to deal with the architects 
and maintenance of the standards of architectural 
education and profession with recognized qualifications. 
The scope of the AICTE Act, in the opinion of the Bench, 
covered various programmes of education, research and 
training in wide range of subjects including architecture. 
The Bench held that the 1972 Act was not impliedly 
repealed by the 1987 Act and quashed the order of the 
AICTE authorities reducing the intake capacity.  Relying, 
inter alia, on a decision of a two-Judge Bench of this Court 
in the case of Bharathidasan University and Another vs. 
All India Council for Technical Education & Others,1  
the High Court upheld the power of regulatory body under 
the 1972 Act as the final authority for the purpose of fixing 
the norms and standards of institutions running course 
on architecture. In the judgment appealed against, it was 
observed, after referring to different authorities: - 
“20…….. It is obvious that the legislature never 
intended to confer on the AICTE a super power 
undermining 
the 
status, 
authority 
and 
autonomous functioning of the existing statutory 
bodies in areas and spheres assigned to them 
under the respective legislations. There is 
 
1  (2001) 8 SCC 676 
10 
 
nothing in the AICTE Act to suggest a legislative 
intention to belittle and destroy the authority or 
autonomy of Council of Architecture which is 
having its own assigned role to perform. The role 
of the AICTE vis-à-vis the Council of Architects 
is advisory and recommendatory and as a 
guiding factor and thereby subserving the cause 
of maintaining appropriate standards and 
qualitative norms. It is impossible to conceive 
that the Parliament intended to abrogate the 
provisions of the Architects Act embodying a 
complete code for architectural education, 
including qualifications of the architects by 
enacting a general provision like section 10 of the 
AICTE Act. It is clear that the Parliament did 
have before it the Architects Act when it passed 
AICTE Act and Parliament never meant that the 
provisions of the Architects Act stand pro tanto 
repealed by section 10 of the AICTE Act. We, 
therefore, hold that the provisions of the 
Architects Act are not impliedly repealed by the 
enactment of AICTE Act because in so far as the 
Architecture Institutions are concerned, the final 
authority for the purposes of fixing the norms 
and standards would be the Council of 
Architecture. Accordingly, we quash and set 
aside the order of the Deputy Director reducing 
the intake capacity of the petitioner college of 
architecture from 40 to 30. Rule is accordingly 
made absolute in terms of prayer clauses (a) and 
(b) with no order as to costs.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
SLP(C) No.5400 of 2011 also originates from a 
similar controversy and the appellant in this proceeding is 
Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidayalaya. This 
appeal arises out of a judgment delivered by a Division 
Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in a Writ Petition 
brought by a Society (Bhartiya Vidya Mandir Shiksha 
Samiti) running a college of Architecture. The said writ 
petition was registered as W.P. No.315 of 2011 and the 
11 
 
judgment was delivered on 2nd February, 2011. In this 
case, the institution had been granted permission by the 
AICTE to conduct B. Arch Degree course with intake of 80 
students for the academic sessions 2010-2011 and it was 
seeking affiliation from the said University. The Directorate 
of Technical Education had allotted 16 students to the 
institute upon conducting online counselling. The CoA, 
however, had mandated that the said institution ought to 
have a separate building, independent school or college of 
architecture and it should have separate infrastructure 
facilities for the aforesaid purpose. The appellant 
University (respondent No.2 in the Writ Petition) informed 
the institution that it could grant affiliation to them after 
approval of the programme B. Arch. by the CoA. This was 
contained in clause 2 of a communication issued by the 
University, dated 6th September 2010. In course of hearing 
before the High Court, as recorded in the judgment under 
appeal, it was submitted on behalf of the institution that it 
would construct their own building for the purpose of B. 
Arch. Degree course within a period of one year. The Bench 
of Madhya Pradesh High Court directed the appellant 
University to consider the matter with regard to grant of 
temporary affiliation to the institution without insisting 
12 
 
upon compliance of condition No.2 in the letter dated 6th 
September 
2010. 
The 
Bench, 
however, 
directed 
compliance of aforesaid condition of the CoA within a 
period of one year for conducting the said course and if no 
such compliance was made, and the institution could not 
get approval from AICTE (respondent No.3 in that 
proceeding) within the stipulated period, admission of 
students for B. Arch. course in future was made 
impermissible. In this decision, co-existence of power of 
both the regulatory bodies was in substance accepted. One 
of the questions on which the University wants decision of 
this Court in this appeal is whether the various regulations 
framed in pursuance of the 1972 Act could be overlooked 
by the Bench of the High Court in issuing such directions. 
12. 
SLP(Civil) No. 8443 of 2011 is an appeal by the 
institution concerned, being Bhartiya Vidya Mandir 
Shiksha Samiti, assailing the same judgment of the 
Madhya Pradesh High Court, delivered in Writ Petition No. 
315 of 2011 on 2nd February 2011.  In this appeal also, the 
question of conflict of powers in deciding admission norms 
between CoA and AICTE has been raised. The power of the 
13 
 
CoA to direct construction of a separate building is 
specifically questioned in this appeal. 
13. 
The same judgment has also been assailed by the 
CoA in SLP(Civil) No. 20460 of 2011. One of the grievances 
of the CoA in this appeal is that it was not made a party in 
the Writ Petition in which the High Court had directed 
granting of temporary affiliation to the institution without 
insisting on approval of Council of Architecture. On 18th 
July 2011, a Bench comprising of two Judges of this Court 
granted permission to CoA to file this SLP.  The direction 
of the High Court in the judgment under appeal was 
conditional in that the respondent-institution was 
required to construct and create separate building and 
infrastructure within a period of one year. That was the 
specific requirement of CoA so far as Bhartiya Vidya 
Mandir Shiksha Samiti is concerned. 
14. 
SLP(Civil) No.17006 of 2016 has been instituted by 
AICTE challenging the legality of a common judgment and 
order passed by a Division Bench of the Karnataka High 
Court in Writ Appeal No.110 of 2013 and Writ Appeal 
No.112 of 2013. The dispute in these two appeals, inter-
alia, was over contradictory directives issued by the CoA 
14 
 
and AICTE in relation to admission of two students for the 
academic session 2011-2012 beyond the intake capacity 
by an institution operated by one BMS Educational Trust. 
The intake capacity so far as course of architecture was 
concerned for the applicable academic session was 80 
students. The appellate committee of the AICTE had 
recommended that excess admission fee, five times that of 
total fee collected per student, ought to have been levied in 
each case of admission beyond the intake capacity. On the 
other hand, CoA had given its approval for intake of 
additional two students during the academic year 2011-
2012 on condition that the institution would admit two 
students less than that of its intake capacity of 80 for the 
next academic session i.e. 2012-2013. In the writ petition, 
the  learned Single Judge, referring to a decision of the 
Bombay High Court in the case of Khayti Girish Purnima 
Kulkarni Vs. College of Architecture & Ors.2,  had held 
that approval of CoA was sufficient and it was not 
necessary that the petitioners (the aforesaid Trust) had to 
seek approval from the AICTE. In the appeal preferred by 
the AICTE before an Appellate Bench of the same Court, it 
 
2  2012 (4) AIR BOM R 371 
15 
 
was held in substance by the Division Bench that the 
decision of the learned Single Judge would be ultimately 
subject to outcome of the pending appeal before this Court 
on the same point. That appeal, we are apprised, is the 
first case in this batch of appeals. In the case of  Khayti 
Girish Purnima Kulkarni (supra), the judgment of the 
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Shri Prince 
Shivaji 
Maratha 
Boarding 
House’s 
Council 
of 
Architecture,  Kolhapur  Vs. State of Maharashtra and 
Ors. was referred to and followed. 
15. 
SLP(Civil) No.17005 of 2016 is also against same 
judgment by the Division Bench of the Karnataka High 
Court by which two writ appeals stood disposed of.  AICTE 
is the appellant in this appeal. The origin of this appeal lies 
in the writ petition instituted by BMS School of 
Architecture. Legality of a circular issued by the 
Visvesvaraya University dated 19th September, 2011 
mandating all institutions teaching architecture to secure 
approval of the AICTE was questioned in that writ petition. 
Also assailed in the writ petition was an order issued by 
the State Government on 21st September, 2011 in 
substance directing compliance of the same requirement. 
16 
 
The main point involved in this appeal is if AICTE norms 
can be made applicable in respect of architecture course 
or not. 
16. 
SLP(Civil) No.28121 of 2018 (Muslim Educational 
Association Vs. The University of Calicut & Ors.) arises 
out of a decision of a Division Bench of the High Court of 
Kerala.  In this decision, it has been held that approval of 
AICTE is necessary for starting a new college of 
architecture. The petitioner in that case before the High 
Court was the said Association, which had obtained 
approval of the CoA for starting the college. The affiliating 
university – the University of Calicut had declined 
approval. One of the reasons for that was that the 
Association had not obtained approval from AICTE.  The 
Association approached the High Court invoking its writ 
jurisdiction questioning legality of the decision of the 
university declining its affiliation. In the judgment 
delivered on 29th August 2018 (in W.P.(Civil) No. 25412 of 
2018) the High Court primarily addressed the question as 
to whether approval of AICTE was necessary in addition to 
the recognition or approval granted by the CoA. Following 
an earlier decision of the same Court in the case of  Thejus 
17 
 
College of Architecture Vs. State of Kerala & Ors. in 
W.P.(C) No.23858 of 2018, decided on 6th August 2018, the 
Bench dismissed the Writ Petition, inter-alia, on the 
reasoning that it did not have approval of the AICTE.   
17. 
In some of the cases involved in these proceedings 
appeal, the CoA has been prescribing certain measures for 
individual institutions to undertake to bring them at par 
with CoA norms. The specific provision of the 1972 Act or 
the regulations framed thereunder does not specifically 
provide for prescribing such corrective measures.  Such 
directives, however, in our opinion, are incidental to the 
regulatory powers conferred upon the CoA. 
18. 
There are specific provisions in the 1972 Act dealing 
with setting standards and norms for institutions dealing 
with the education of architecture. Some of these 
provisions have been referred to earlier in this judgment. 
There are also provisions for monitoring quality of 
education being imparted by the respective institutions. 
The CoA has also the power to make representation to the 
Central government in the event there are breaches of 
norms or standards prescribed by the regulations, which 
may ultimately result in withdrawal of such recognition. 
18 
 
The decision making hierarchy within the CoA for making 
representations to the Central Government has also been 
statutorily prescribed, running up from inspectors to 
Executive Committee and ultimately the Council. 
19. 
Both the regulatory authorities under the respective 
statutes have power to frame regulations for giving effect 
to the provisions of the respective Acts. Power to make 
rules in respect of certain areas covered by the statutes 
have been vested in the Central Government both under 
the 1972 Act and the 1987 Act. So far as CoA is concerned, 
their power to make regulations is derived from Section 45 
of the 1972 Act. The said provision stipulates: - 
"45. Power of Council to make regulations. 
(1) The Council may, with the approval of the Cen-
tral    Government, [by notification in the Official 
Gazette] make regulations not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder 
to carry out the  purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the                
generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for— 
(a) the management of the property of the Coun-
cil; 
(b) the powers and duties of the President and 
the Vice-President of the Council; 
(c) the summoning and holding of meetings of the 
Council and the Executive Committee or any 
other committee constituted under Section 10, 
the times and places at which such meetings 
shall be held, the conduct of business thereat 
and the number of persons necessary to consti-
tute a quorum; 
19 
 
(d) the functions of the Executive Committee or 
of any other committee constituted under Sec-
tion 10; 
(e) the courses and periods of study and of               
practical training, if any, to be undertaken, 
the subjects of examinations and standards of               
proficiency therein to be obtained in any col-
lege or institution for grant of recognised                
qualifications; 
(f) the appointment, powers and duties of                 
inspector; 
(g) 
the 
standards 
of 
staff, 
equipment,                          
accommodation, training and other facilities 
for architectural education; 
(h) 
the 
conduct 
of 
professional                               
examinations, qualifications of examiners 
and the conditions of admission to such                        
examinations; 
(i) the standards of professional conduct and            
etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by                  
architects; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be or may be                   
provided by regulations under this Act and in                   
respect of which no rules have been made.” 
(3) Every regulation made under this section shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be                        
comprised in one session or in two or more                    
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in     making any modification in the regulation or 
both Houses agree that the regulation should not 
be made, the  regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such                 
modification or annulment shall be without              
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation.” (emphasis supplied). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. 
The power to frame regulations by the AICTE 
originates from Section 23 of the 1987 Act.  This section 
stipulates:- 
20 
 
“23.  Power to make regulations.—(1) The Council 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make                   
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, and the rules generally to carry out the                  
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener-
ality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) regulating the meetings of the Council and the            
procedure for conducting business thereat; 
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the of-
ficers and employees of the Council; 
(c) regulating the meetings of the Executive Com-
mittee and the procedure for conducting busi-
ness thereat; 
(d) the area of concern, the constitution, and 
powers and functions of the Board of Studies; 
(e) the region for which the Regional Committee 
be      established and the constitution and func-
tions of such Committee.” 
 
21. 
Under the 1987 Act, the power of Central 
Government to make rules is derived from Section 22 of 
the Act.  The said provision stipulates:- 
“22. Power to make rules.— 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener-
ality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the members 
in the discharge of their functions; 
(b) the inspection of technical institutions and      
Universities; 
(c) the form and manner in which the budget and      
reports are to be prepared by the Council; 
21 
 
(d) the manner in which the accounts of the 
Council are to be maintained; and 
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be,       
prescribed” 
 
22. 
Similar power on the Central Government has been 
conferred under Section 44 of the 1972 Act, which lays 
down:- 
“44. Power of Central Government to make rules.-
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the gener-
ality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely— 
(a) the manner in which elections under Chapter 
II shall be conducted, the terms and conditions 
of service of the members of the Tribunal ap-
pointed under sub-section (2) of Section 5 and 
the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal; 
(b) the procedure to be followed by the expert 
committee constituted under the proviso to sub-
section (2) of Section 14 in the transaction of its 
business and the powers and duties of the expert 
committee and the travelling and daily allow-
ances payable to the members thereof; 
(c) the particulars to be included in the register 
of                 architects under sub-section (3) of 
Section 23; 
(d) the form in which a certificate of registration 
is to be issued under sub-section (7) of Section 
24, sub-section (4) of Section 26 and Section 33; 
(e) the fee to be paid under Sections 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 32 and 33; 
(f) the conditions on which a name may be                    
restored to the register under the proviso to sub-
section (2) of Section 27; 
(g) 
the 
manner 
of 
endorsement 
under                          
sub-section (3) of Section 27; 
(h) the manner in which the Council shall hold 
an enquiry under Section 30; 
22 
 
(i) the fee for supplying printed copies of the reg-
ister under Section 34; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be or may be                 
provided by rules under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this Section shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of     Parliament, while it is in session, for a total pe-
riod of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification to the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of an-
ything previously done under that rule.” 
 
23. 
In course of hearing before us, on behalf of AICTE 
three Regulations have been brought to our notice by Mr. 
Pandey, learned counsel representing this body. The first 
one carries the title “All India Council for Technical 
Education (Grant of approval for starting new technical 
institutions, introduction of courses or programmes and 
approval of intake capacity of seats for the courses or 
programmes) Regulations, 1994.” This Regulation has 
been framed by the AICTE in exercise of power under 
Section 23(1) of the 1987 Act and became effective on 31st 
October, 1994.  Another Regulation, framed also in 
exercise of power under Section 23(1) read with Sections 
10 and 11 of the 1987 Act of the year 2016 in supersession 
23 
 
of earlier regulations has also been referred to. But so far 
as the present appeals are concerned, the respective 
causes of action predates this regulation of 2016 except in 
the case of the Muslim Educational Association, i.e. 
S.L.P.(Civil) No.28121 of 2018. The other Regulation is 
titled “All India Council for Technical Education (Norms 
and Guidelines for Fees and guidelines for admission in 
Professional Colleges) Regulations, 1994, framed in 
exercise of powers conferred under Section 23(1) and 
Sections 10 (j) and (o), 1987 Act.  This one is dated 20th 
May, 1994. No other regulation or rule has been brought 
to our notice in course of hearing on behalf of AICTE. 
24. 
Dr. 
Rajeev 
Dhavan, 
learned 
senior 
counsel 
representing the CoA has referred to Minimum Standard 
of Architectural Education Regulations, 1983, framed by 
CoA in exercise of powers conferred by clauses (e), (g), (h) 
and (j) of sub-section (2) of Section 45 read with Section 21 
of the 1972 Act. Another document which was produced 
before us by Dr. Dhavan is the annual report of CoA for 
the year 2017-2018. So far as this document is concerned, 
its relevance for adjudication of these appeals would be the 
content recorded under following two sub-heads therein:- 
24 
 
“14.0 APPROVAL OF NEW INSTITUTIONS IN 
THE  ACADEMIC SESSION 2017-18:- 
During the year under the report 22 new institutions 
were granted approval to impart Bachelor of Architecture 
Courses and 6 existing institutions were granted                       
approval for imparting PG Courses. 
With this, the total number of institutions imparting    
recognized courses in architecture in the year 2017-18 
with the approval of Council are 468. 
The annual intake of students sanctioned by the Council 
at Undergraduate level is approximately 24741, Post-
graduate level is 1640. 
 
 15.0 EXTENSION OF APPROVAL FOR THE    
ACADEMIC SESSION 2017-18 ONWARDS: 
The Council granted extension of approval or otherwise for 
UG and PG Courses for the academic session 2017-18 as 
under:- 
i) Institutions granted extension of approval for B.Arch. 
Course: 408 
ii) Institutions granted extension of approval for M. Arch. 
Course: 64 
iii) Institutions put on ‘No Admission’ : 12 
iv) Institution put on ‘withdrawal of approval’ : NIL 
The Council also initiated the process of inspection for the 
academic session 2018-2019 which were due for                
inspections.” 
 
Reporting on these subjects demonstrate CoA’s 
continued engagement in the process of recognition of 
“authorities” granting architectural qualification. 
25. 
We find that both the statutes have provisions for 
approval and monitoring of architecture courses run by 
institutions. So far as the 1972 Act is concerned, the 
expression employed is recognition of qualification and the 
25 
 
ultimate authority for granting or withdrawing recognition 
to degree or diploma courses in architectural education by 
different academic institutions is the Central Government.  
The CoA under the statutory scheme however has 
significant role in such decision making process. AICTE 
has also been empowered under the 1987 Act to lay down 
standards and norms for courses on architecture along 
with other subjects coming within the term “technical 
education”. We have extracted relevant parts of Section 10 
of the 1987 Act earlier in this judgment. Both the Councils 
also 
appear 
to 
have 
had 
proceeded 
with 
this 
understanding. In the decision of the Bombay High Court 
delivered in the case of Shri Prince Shivaji Maratha 
Boarding House’s Council of Architecture, (supra), it is 
recorded in the judgment under appeal that joint 
inspection was held in respect of the institution involved 
in that proceeding by AICTE and CoA. Moreover, under 
Section 3(3)(b), of the 1972 Act, the CoA is required to have 
two persons nominated by the AICTE. On the other hand, 
Section 3 (4) (m) of the 1987 Act stipulates that AICTE is 
to consist of representatives of various bodies, including a 
member to be appointed by the Central Government to 
represent the CoA.  Section 10(k) of the 1987 Act requires 
26 
 
AICTE to grant approval in consultation with the agencies 
concerned.  
26. 
Though both the enactments deal with several 
aspects of the main subject matter of the respective 
legislations, 
on 
the 
aspect 
of 
setting 
norms 
for 
architectural education and for monitoring the institutions 
engaged in imparting architectural education, there are 
overlapping powers of these two Councils. Section 14 of 
the 1972 Act has been reproduced earlier in this judgment. 
On 
the 
aspect 
of 
recognising 
any 
architectural 
qualification, Sections 18 and 19 thereof stipulate: 
“18. Power to require information as to courses 
of study and examinations.- Every authority in 
India which grants a recognised qualification shall 
furnish such information as the Council may, from 
time to time, require as to the courses of study and 
examinations to be undergone in order to obtain 
such qualification, as to the ages at which such 
courses of study and examinations are required to 
be undergone and such qualification is conferred 
and generally as to the requisites for obtaining 
such qualification. 
19. Inspection of examinations.- 
1.  The Executive Committee shall, subject to 
regulations, if any, made by the Council, appoint 
such number of inspectors as it may deem requisite 
to inspect any college or institution where 
architectural education is given or to attend any 
examination held by any college or institution for 
the purpose of recommending to the Central 
Government 
recognition 
of 
architectural 
qualifications granted by that college or institution. 
2.  The inspectors shall not interfere with the 
conduct of any training or examination, but shall 
report to the Executive Committee on the adequacy 
27 
 
of the standards of architectural education 
including 
staff, 
equipment, 
accommodation, 
training and such other facilities as may be 
prescribed by regulations for giving such education 
or on the sufficiency of every examination which 
they attend. 
3.  The Executive Committee shall forward a copy 
of such report to the college or institution and shall 
also forward copies with remarks, if any, of the 
college or institution thereon, to the Central 
Government.” 
27. 
Section 20 of the 1972 Act deals with withdrawal of 
recognition of an authority listed in the Schedule to the 
Act. The process involves a report by the Executive 
Committee of the CoA.  On the basis of such report, if it 
appears to the Council that the courses of study and 
examination held in any college or institution or the staff, 
equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities 
for staff and training provided in such college or institution 
do not conform to the standards prescribed by the 
regulations then the CoA is empowered to make a 
representation for withdrawal of recognition to the 
appropriate Government. Section 21 of the 1972 Act also 
empowers the Council to prescribe minimum standards of 
architectural education required for granting recognized 
qualifications by colleges or institutions in India. 
28. 
From the nature of the dispute giving rise to these 
seven appeals, it is apparent that the shortcomings 
28 
 
pointed out by the two regulatory bodies relate primarily 
to infrastructural facilities of the respective institutions. 
The power of the CoA to examine such infrastructural 
facilities at the time of considering the application for 
recognition or monitoring the quality of an institution 
recognized by the Council stems from Sections 18, 19, 20 
and 21 of the 1972 Act.  
29. 
A Regulation has been framed by the CoA with the 
approval of the Central Government titled as the Council 
of Architecture Regulations, 1982. Part VIII of the 1982 
Regulations 
deals 
with 
inspection 
of 
educational 
institutions of Architecture. Clauses 29 and 30 thereof 
stipulate: 
“29. Inspection of educational institutions 
and their examinations.- The inspection of 
architectural institutions and the attendance 
at the time of training and examination under 
section 19 shall be carried out in accordance 
with the following manner, namely : - 
(1) each institution imparting instruction in 
architecture shall be inspected by the 
inspectors once in five years: 
(2) the Registrar shall fix the date of 
inspection 
in 
consultation 
with 
the 
inspector or inspectors and the institution; 
(3) the Executive Committee shall appoint 
such number of inspectors as may be 
deemed necessary to inspect an institution 
or to attend any examinations and to report 
thereon:  
29 
 
Provided that the minimum number of 
inspectors for such inspection shall be two. 
(4) (a) every inspector shall receive from the 
Chairman, Executive Committee, a formal 
commission in writing under the seal of the 
Council; 
(b) the instructions of the Chairman shall 
specify the institution or institutions, 
courses 
of 
studies 
and 
scheme 
of 
examination or examinations or training 
programme 
or 
educational 
standards 
including 
staff, 
equipments, 
accommodation, 
training 
and 
other 
facilities which are required to be inspected 
or attended; 
(c)  the Chairman shall inform the inspector 
that he is to report to the Executive 
Committee who shall submit their final 
report with recommendations to the Council 
in accordance with these regulations; 
(d) the Registrar shall provide the inspector 
with a copy of the documents and of the 
recommendations of the Council in regard 
to recognition of the qualifications or 
educational standards and improvements 
to be made thereon and of the resolutions 
with regard to architectural education.” 
 
“30. Powers and duties of Inspectors.-  
(1) It shall be the duty of the inspector: - 
(a) to make himself acquainted with such 
previous reports, if any, on the institution 
or institutions which he is appointed to 
inspect as the Executive Committee may 
direct and with the observations of the 
University or examining body and the report 
of the Council thereon; 
(b) to attend personally institution or 
examination or training which he is 
required to inspect but not to interfere with 
the conduct thereof; 
(c) to inspect the institution which provides 
a recognized course of study or has applied 
for the recognition of its course of study and 
scheme of examination and to see that the 
course is in conformity with the regulations 
30 
 
relating to education and the standards laid 
down by the Council; 
(d) to report to the Executive Committee his 
opinion as to the sufficiency or insufficiency 
of standards of education or examination or 
institution inspected by him; 
(e) to set forth in his report, in order, all the 
necessary particulars as to the question 
proposed in the written, oral or practical 
parts of each examination attended by him, 
the sessional and class work submitted by 
the candidates at the time of practical or 
viva-voce examination, the arrangements 
made for invigilation, the method and scales 
of making, the standard of knowledge 
shown by the successful candidates and 
generally all such details as may be required 
for adjudicating on the scope and character 
of the examination; 
(f) to set forth in his report necessary 
particulars in respect of institutions so as to 
enable the Executive Committee to assess 
the existing facilities for teaching as well as 
the extent to which the recommendations of 
the 
Council 
regarding 
professional 
education have been given effect to;  
(g) to compare, on receipt from the 
Registrar, proof copy of any of his reports, 
the proof with the original and correct, sign 
and 
return 
it 
to 
the 
Registrar 
for 
preservation in the records of the Council as 
the authentic copy of such report. 
(2) Every report of the inspector or inspectors 
shall be signed and submitted to the Executive 
Committee. 
(3) The reports of inspectors shall be deemed 
confidential, unless in any particular case the 
Executive Committee otherwise directs. 
(4) Copies of the report by inspectors marked 
confidential 
shall 
be 
forwarded 
to 
the 
University or the examining body concerned 
as well as the institution with a request that 
the authority should furnish to the Executive 
Committee within six months from the date of 
dispatch, such observations thereon as they 
may think necessary. 
(5) A confidential copy of report of an inspector 
or inspectors, with the observations of the 
31 
 
University or the examining body or the 
institution thereon, shall be supplied to each 
member 
of 
the 
Council 
and 
shall 
be 
considered together with comments of the 
Executive Committee by the Council along 
with the observations thereon of the Executive 
Committee for consideration by the Council at 
their next meeting. 
(6) A copy of every report by the inspector or 
inspectors, with the observations of the 
University or the examining body and the 
institution concerned and the opinion of the 
Executive Committee thereon, shall, after 
approval by the Council, be forwarded to the 
Central Government and State Government 
concerned.” 
30. 
The Minimum Standards of Architectural Education 
Regulations 1983 in particular, deals with the academic 
and infrastructural features of architecture courses. 
Clause (5) of the said Regulations provides:- 
“5 Intake and Migration:- 
(1)  The sanctioned intake of candidates at 
the first year level shall not exceed a 
maximum of 40 in a class. If more than 40 
candidates are admitted, separate classes 
shall be organized. 
(2)  The institutions may permit, at their 
discretion, migration of students from one 
institution to another subject to the 
maximum 
number 
of 
students 
not 
exceeding the permitted maximum intake in 
a class.” 
 
Clause 8 of the 1983 Regulations further provides:- 
“8. 
Standards 
of 
staff, 
equipment, 
accommodation, 
training 
and 
other 
facilities for technical education 
(1) 
The 
institutions 
shall 
maintain 
a 
teacher/student ratio of 1:8. 
32 
 
(2) The institutions shall have a minimum 
number of 12 faculty members for a student 
strength of 100. 
(3) The institution with the maximum intake of 
40 in a class may have the faculty pattern as 
prescribed in Appendix-B. 
(4) The institutions shall encourage the faculty 
members to involve in professional practice 
including research. 
(5) The institutions shall provide facilities as 
indicated in Appendix-C. 
(6) The institutions shall encourage exchange of 
faculty members for academic programmes. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in these 
regulations, the institutions may prescribe 
minimum standards of Architectural Education 
provided such standards does not, in the 
opinion of the Council, fall below the minimum 
standards prescribed from time to time by the 
Council to meet the requirements of the 
profession and education thereof.” 
  
 
 
 
31. 
Appendix B to these Regulations deal with 
designation, pay-scale and qualification required to be 
prescribed for faculty positions. The content thereof is not 
being reproduced in this judgment as for the purpose of 
determining the issues involved in these appeals, the 
stipulations barring those contained in Appendix C are not 
of much significance. Appendix C thereof reads: - 
“APPENDIX-C 
Physical Facilities 
The Institution of Architecture should be 
located in a building to have a floor area of 
about 15 sq.m.m. per student. The building 
should include class rooms and at least 5 
studios, adequate space for faculty members, 
library, 
workshop, 
materials 
museum, 
33 
 
laboratories, 
exhibition/conference 
room, 
office accommodation and common area for 
students and staff. The space requirements 
per 
student 
for 
architectural 
education 
whether in the Institution or in the Hostel are 
apt to be more than for most other types of 
professional courses like engineering and 
medicine because of the large space required 
for preparation of drawings. This factor should 
be borne in mind in the design of Hostels and 
Studios. 
Facilities may also be provided for extra-
curricular activities and sports. 
The equipment in the workshop/laboratories 
has also to be provided to meet with the 
special 
requirement 
for 
architectural 
education. It is desirable to provide locker 
facilities in the studios for students. 
The Library, Workshops, Laboratories and 
Photography unit should be managed by 
professionally qualified staff with adequate 
supporting staff to assist the students and 
faculty 
members 
in 
their 
academic 
programmes. 
There 
should 
also 
be 
administrative supporting staff to run the 
Architectural Institutions. 
It 
is 
desirable 
to 
provide 
hostel 
accommodation 
and 
residential 
accommodation for staff and students in close 
proximity of the institution.” 
 
32. 
So far as the two Regulations of 1994 under the 
1987 Act produced before us on behalf of AICTE, the 
Regulations dated 20th May, 1994 contemplates fixing 
approval norms and intake capacity to professional 
colleges.  Clause 2 of this Regulation however exempts 
universities, 
university 
departments 
or 
colleges, 
government colleges, aided colleges and certain other 
institutions from its application. The next one has been 
34 
 
made applicable to all new technical institutions including 
universities and subsisting technical institutions and lays 
down a detailed approval process through multi-tier 
decision making structure. The AICTE appears to have 
made subsequent Regulations time to time superseding 
the earlier ones in respect of the approval process, but 
barring the Regulations made in 2016, no other 
regulations has been produced before us.  None of the 
Regulations produced before us however specify the actual 
norms but refer to standards and norms to be laid down 
for approval of technical institutions, which include 
institutions imparting architectural education. 
33. 
Clause 6 of the 1994 regulations dated 31st October, 
1994 deals with conditions for grant of approval, which 
stipulates: 
“6. Conditions for grant of approval.- Every 
application 
under 
sub-regulation 
(1) 
of 
regulation 4 shall be considered subject to the 
fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:- 
(i) 
The financial position of the applicant 
shall be sound for investment in developed 
land and in providing related infrastructure 
and instructional facilities as per the norms 
and standards laid down by the Council from 
time to time and for meeting annual recurring 
expenditure: 
(ii) 
The courses or programmes shall be 
conducted as per the assessed technical 
manpower demands; 
35 
 
(iii) 
The 
admissions 
shall 
be 
made 
according to the regulations and directions of 
the Council for such admissions in the 
respective technical institution or university; 
(iv) 
The tuition and other fees shall be 
charged with the overall criteria as may be laid 
down by the Council; 
(v) 
The staff shall be recruited as per the 
norms and standards specified by the Council 
from time to time; 
(vi) 
the governing Body in case of private 
technical institutions shall be as per the 
norms as specified by the council; 
 
34. 
Appearing on behalf of AICTE in Civil Appeal No.364 
of 2005, the fact that there are overlapping provisions on 
the question of grant of approval and subsequent 
monitoring of architectural education under both these 
Acts, has not been seriously disputed by Mr. Pandey. His 
main submission is that the 1987 Act being a later statute, 
covering common field, the provisions of the 1972 Act, to 
the extent the same deals with architectural education, 
shall be deemed to have been repealed by implication. The 
judgment of this Court relied upon on this point is the case 
of Ajoy Kumar Banerjee and Others Vs. Union of India 
and Others3  His further submission is that the power of 
AICTE under the 1987 Act has already been upheld by this 
Court in the case of State of Tamil Nadu and Others Vs.  
 
3  (1984) 3 SCC 127 
36 
 
Adhiyaman 
Educational 
Research 
Institute 
and 
Others4  On the same point, another judgment of this 
Court in the case of Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation 
Limited Vs. Rabi Sankar Patro and Others,5 has also 
been relied upon by him. The other authority he has cited 
in support of his submission that the Rules and 
Regulations framed by the AICTE has the force of law and 
binding is the case of Parshvnath Charitable Trust and 
Others Vs. All India Council for Technical Education 
and Others6  In the case of Varun Saini & Ors. Vs. Guru 
Govind Singh Indraprastha University
7  also, the 
necessity on the part of the technical institutions for 
taking prior approval of AICTE has been highlighted. 
35. 
Primacy of AICTE on the question of giving approval 
to a technical institution and subsequent monitoring 
thereof have been discussed in the cases of Orissa Lift 
Irrigation Corporation Limited (supra) and Parshvanath 
Charitable Trust and Others (supra). But in these two 
cases, the question of inter-se primacy between the rival 
regulatory bodies covering the same subject did not arise. 
 
4  (1995) 4 SCC 104 
5  (2018) 1 SCC 468 
6  (2013) 3 SCC 385 
7  (2014) 16 SCC 330 
37 
 
In the case of Parshvanath Charitable Trust (supra), the 
dispute was on the question as to whether shifting of 
location of college running courses on technical education 
could be effected without obtaining a ‘No Objection 
Certificate’ (NOC) from the AICTE. The Handbook of 
Approval Process, 2008 provides for obtaining NOCs from 
the State Government, UT administration and affiliating 
bodies concerned with the AICTE as per laid down 
procedure subject to the fulfilment of norms and 
standards of AICTE. The college concerned had changed 
location without adhering to the aforesaid procedure and 
it was held by this Court in that decision that withdrawal 
of approval by the AICTE was valid, there being no 
compliance with the legal requirements and binding 
conditions of recognition, inter-alia, by the AICTE. The lis 
in the case of Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Limited 
(supra) arose out of a dispute pertaining to service 
conditions of engineers including junior engineers of the 
said Corporation. In that case, a diploma holder in 
electrical engineering had joined the Corporation as junior 
engineer (electrical) and while in service he acquired 
B.Tech. (Civil) degree from a deemed university. The said 
deemed university did not have approval of the AICTE. 
38 
 
That University had started its distance education 
programme without taking approval from any of the 
regulatory 
authorities 
including 
University 
Grants 
Commission (UGC) and AICTE.  In this decision also, 
judgment in the case of Bharathidasan University (supra) 
was taken note of.  It was however held that deemed 
universities, whose courses were subject of dispute in the 
aforesaid cases were required to abide by the provisions of 
the AICTE Regulations and could not introduce courses 
leading to award of degrees in engineering without the 
approval of AICTE. 
36. 
In the case of State of Tamil Nadu and Another 
Vs. Adhiyaman Educational and Research Institute and 
Others8, the controversy arose out of certain overlapping 
provisions between the 1987 Act and Madras University 
Act, 1923.  The disputes were mainly on the aspects of 
prescribing terms and conditions for affiliation of different 
institutions including engineering colleges. It was held 
that in respect of the subjects specified under Section 10 
of the 1987 Act in respect of institutions imparting 
technical education, it would not be the University Act but 
 
8  (1995) 4 SCC 104 
39 
 
the Central Act and the Council created under it would 
have the jurisdiction to that extent. It was held that after 
coming into operation of the Central Act, the provisions of 
the University Act would be deemed to have become 
unenforceable. 
In 
case 
of 
technical 
colleges 
like 
engineering colleges, this view was taken by this Court, 
having regard to the fact that the Central statue had been 
enacted by the Parliament under Entry 66 of List I as well 
as Entry 25 of List III.  It was also held in that judgment 
that the provisions of the University Act regarding 
affiliation of technical colleges like the engineering colleges 
and the conditions for grant and continuation of such 
affiliation by the University was to remain operative but 
the conditions that are prescribed by the University for 
grant and continuance of affiliation will have to be in 
conformity with the norms and guidelines prescribed by 
the Council in respect of matters entrusted to it under 
Section 10 of the Central Act. 
37. 
Learned counsel representing the AICTE has 
referred to a communication emanating from the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development, Government of India, 
40 
 
bearing No.F.17 11/2003 TS.IV. This communication 
specifically deals with this conflict and specifies:   
“The mandate given to the AICTE is to coordinate 
the development of technical education in the 
country at all levels. Grants of approval for 
starting new technical educational institutions 
and 
for 
introduction 
of 
new 
courses 
or 
Programmes in consultations with the agencies 
concerned. Although, the Council of Architecture 
deals with mainly architect profession and the 
Architect Act may be taken as a Special Act 
dealing with profession of architecture, the overall 
planning and coordination of technical education 
falls within the ambit of AICTE. For starting new 
courses, increase in intake, setting up of new 
technical institutions, the power is vested with 
AICTE under Section 10(k) of the AICTE Act. In 
that process AICTE has to inspect institutions, 
look into their infrastructure, set up norms and 
standards as per the power provided in the AICTE 
Act. The Architect Act does not have any power to 
set up any institute or grant approval to new 
courses or increase in intake. For the benefit of 
the profession, the Architect Act provides the 
council the authority to prescribe minimum 
standards of architectural education for the 
colleges or institutions in India. Regulations 
framed under Architect Act, 1972, also provides 
for inspection of institution once in five year and 
make recommendation to the central government. 
The ministry therefore feels that there is no 
overlapping of power between the two statutory 
bodies in so far as inspections of institutions are 
concerned. The architecture education is to be 
governed under AICTE Act and CoA should 
maintain register for recognition of architects who 
have completed full time Programmes/courses as 
approved 
by 
the 
AICTE 
or 
qualifications 
mentioned in the schedule of CoA Act. 
 
The matter regarding implementation of 
various provisions, under the Architect Act, 1972 
and the AICTE Act, 1987 has been considered in 
the ministry and after careful examination the 
ministry is of the view that all aspect of 
architectural education shall be concern of the 
AICTE and CoA would look into the architect 
profession 
and 
ethics 
for 
maintaining 
its 
professionalism in the field of Architecture.” 
41 
 
 
38. 
It is brought to our notice by Mr. Pandey, referring to 
Section 25 of the 1987 Act, that it is the Central Government 
which is the ultimate authority deciding on issues in giving 
effect to the provisions of the 1987 Act and hence the 
aforesaid memorandum ought to be given effect to while 
construing the conflict arising from these two statutes.  
Section 25 of the 1987 Act stipulates:-  
“25. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any                
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, 
published in the   Official Gazette, make such                 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act as may appear to be     necessary for              
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this 
section after the expiry of two years from the                   
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.” 
39. 
Similar provision is there under Section 43 of the 
1972 Act. But no case has been made out that the 
memorandum to which reference has been made, has been 
published in the official gazette.  This memorandum does 
not meet the requirement of valid exercise of power under 
the aforesaid two provisions by the Central Government so 
as to make it binding. This memorandum, at best, can be 
treated to be an advisory of the Ministry not having 
enforceable effect. Moreover, the aforesaid memorandum 
42 
 
has been issued beyond the timeframe laid down under 
the provisions of the statutes reproduced in the said two 
sections of the respective Acts.  The memorandum also 
cannot be treated to be an executive order under Article 77 
of the Constitution of India.  
40. 
Main submission of Dr. Dhavan has been that since 
the 1972 statute specifically deals with architectural 
education along with certain other areas pertaining to 
regulating the profession of architects, the provisions of 
the said Act ought to prevail over the provisions of the 
1987 Act. This statute, according to him is “architect” and 
“architectural education” specific. On the point of implied 
repeal, his submission is that as a proposition of law, 
implied repeal of an earlier statute under the normal 
circumstances ought not to be presumed merely because 
a subsequent legislation having common subjects of 
legislation comes into operation unless there is express 
provision to that effect. The decisions relied upon in 
support of this proposition is the case of M/s. Mathra 
Parshad and Sons Vs. State of Punjab and Others9. This 
judgment is an authority for the proposition that in 
 
9  1962 Supp (1) SCR 913.  
43 
 
absence of express provision no repeal can be implied 
unless the two statutes cannot stand together.  He also 
referred to another authority i.e. A.B. Abdulkadir Vs. 
State of Kerala10. Relying on the latter authority, he has 
argued that in the event the later Act deals with 
substantially the same subject as that of a former Act, then 
the principle of repeal could be applied. In the case A.B. 
Abdulkadir (supra), however, the subsequent statute, 
being Finance Act, a Central legislation had specific 
provision for repeal of the corresponding laws.   
41. 
He has also referred to several authorities to 
contend that the definition clause has to be construed with 
caution and a particular definition given in such clause 
may have to be reversed, if the statutory context otherwise 
requires.  According to him, the context can be external 
and can relate to another existing legislation. CoA’s case 
on this point is that though architecture is included in the 
definition of “technical education” in the 1987 Act, 
coverage of the said subject in terms of the regulatory 
 
10  1962 Supp (2) SCR 741 
44 
 
framework created thereunder cannot be automatically 
inferred.  The rationale behind this submission of CoA is 
that 
the 
1972 
Act 
covers 
architecture 
education 
specifically in all its aspects. The authorities cited for this 
proposition are:- 
Assn. of Registration Plates v. Union of India11; 
Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks12; 
K.V. Muthu v. Angamuthu Ammal 13 ;Printers 
(Mysore) Ltd. V. Asstt. CTO; 14Pushpa Devi v. 
Milkhi Ram.15 
 
42. 
The distinction or difference between Technical 
institutions and Technical education as contained in the 
1987 statute has been dealt with by the two Judge 
Benches of this Court in the cases of Bharathidasan 
University (supra) and Association of Management of 
Private Colleges (supra).  On the same point, two other 
authorities have been cited on behalf of CoA dealing with 
the repugnancy between a State Act and a Central Act 
under Article 254 of the Constitution of India. These are 
Municipal Council Palai Vs. T.J. Joseph16  and Tika 
 
11 (2005) 1 SCC 679 
12 (1998) 8 SCC 1 
13 , (1997) 2 SCC 53 
14 (1994) 2 SCC 434; 
15  (1990) 2 SCC 134 
16  (1964) 2 SCR 87 
45 
 
Ramji Vs. State of U.P.17  He has further argued that 
under ordinary circumstances, special law ought to 
override the general law. According to him, the 1972 Act is 
a special law, dealing with, inter alia, recognition of 
institutions conducting architectural education.  The 1987 
Act, in his submission is a general law dealing with 
technical education as a whole. It is his case that technical 
education may include degree or diploma in architecture. 
In these appeals, there is specific legislation dealing with 
architectural education.  In the event there is conflict 
between the norms and standards set under the general 
law, which, according to him is the 1987 Act and law 
specifically dealing with architectural education being 
1972 Act, he has argued that proper course would be to 
proceed on the basis that the intention of the legislature 
was to keep out the provisions relating to standards and 
norms pertaining to architectural education from the 1987 
Act and Regulations framed thereunder and mandate 
following the norms and standards stipulated in the 1972 
Act and connected Regulations. Other authorities relied on 
for this proposition are: R.S. Raghunath Vs. State of 
 
17  ((1956) 1 SCR 393 
46 
 
Karnataka 18;   LIC Vs. D.J. Bahadur 19 ;  U.P. State 
Electricity Board Vs. Hari Shankar Jain 20; and J.K. 
Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. Vs. State of 
U.P. 21   These are all authorities in support of the 
proposition of law that a general provision should yield to 
the special provision, if two statutes are in direct conflict. 
43. 
His main reliance is on the case of Bharathidasan 
University (supra), in support of his argument that so far 
as education in Architecture is concerned, the 1972 Act 
ought to survive and not eclipsed by the 1987 legislation. 
In the case of Bharathidasan University, the main point 
involved was as to whether a university in order to start a 
course on technical education was required to obtain prior 
approval of the AICTE or not. The University in question in 
that case was constituted under Bharathidasan University 
Act 1981 with its specified area of operation over three 
districts in the State of Tamil Nadu. The university 
commenced courses in technology related subjects such 
as Information Technology, Management, Bioengineering 
and 
Technology, 
Petrochemical 
Engineering 
and 
 
18 (1992) 1 SCC 335 
19 (1981) 1 SCC 315 
20  (1978) 4 SCC 16 
21  (1961) 3 SCR 185 
47 
 
Technology, Pharmaceutical Engineering and Technology 
etc. The AICTE had objected to running of such courses 
without their prior approval. It filed a writ petition before 
the Madras High Court to prevent the University 
authorities from running/conducting any course or 
programme in technical education. The University took a 
plea that it would not fall within the definition of technical 
institution contained in Section 2 (h) of the 1987 Act and 
thus was outside the purview of Section 10 (k) thereof. 
Section 2 (h) of the 1987 Act stipulates:-      
“(h) 
“Technical 
institution” 
means 
an 
institution, not being a university which offers 
courses or programmes of technical education, 
and shall include such other institutions as 
the Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Council, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare as technical institutions.” 
 
It was held in this judgment :- 
“15. To put it in a nutshell, a reading of 
Section 10 of the AICTE Act will make it 
clear that whenever the Act omits to cover a 
“university”, the same has been specifically 
provided in the provisions of the Act. For 
example, while under clause (k) of Section 
10 only “technical institutions” are referred 
to, clause (o) of Section 10 provides for the 
guidelines for admission of students to 
“technical institutions” and “universities” 
imparting technical education. If we look at 
the definition of a “technical institution” 
under Section 2(h) of the Act, it is clear that 
a “technical institution” cannot include a 
“university”. The clear intention of the 
legislature is not that all institutions 
whether university or otherwise ought to be 
48 
 
treated as “technical institutions” covered 
by the Act. If that was the intention, there 
was no difficulty for the legislature to have 
merely provided a definition of “technical 
institution” by not excluding “university” 
from the definition thereof and thereby 
avoided the necessity to use alongside both 
the words “technical institutions” and 
university in several provisions in the Act. 
The definition of “technical institution” 
excludes from its purview a “university”. 
When 
by 
definition 
a 
“university” 
is 
excluded from a “technical institution”, to 
interpret that such a clause or such an 
expression 
wherever 
the 
expression 
“technical institution” occurs will include a 
“university” will be reading into the Act what 
is not provided therein. The power to grant 
approval 
for 
starting 
new 
technical 
institutions and for introduction of new 
courses or programmes in consultation with 
the agencies concerned is covered by 
Section 10(k) which would not cover a 
“university” 
but 
only 
a 
“technical 
institution”. If Section 10(k) does not cover 
a 
“university” 
but 
only 
a 
“technical 
institution”, a regulation cannot be framed 
in such a manner so as to apply the 
regulation framed in respect of “technical 
institution” to apply to universities when 
the Act maintains a complete dichotomy 
between a “university” and a “technical 
institution”. Thus, we have to focus our 
attention mainly to the Act in question on 
the language adopted in that enactment. In 
that view of the matter, it is, therefore, not 
even necessary to examine the scope of 
other enactments or whether the Act 
prevails over the University Act or effect of 
competing entries falling under Entries 63 
to 65 of List I vis-à-vis Entry 25 of List III of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. 
 
16. The fact that initially the Syndicate of 
the appellant University passed a resolution 
to seek for approval from AICTE and did not 
pursue the matter on those lines thereafter 
or that other similar entities were adopting 
such a course of obtaining the same and 
that the Andhra Pradesh High Court in M. 
Sambasiva Rao case [(1997) 1 An LT 629 
49 
 
(FB)] had taken a particular view of the 
matter are not reasons which can be 
countenanced in law to non-suit the 
appellant. Nor such reasons could be 
relevant or justifying factors to draw any 
adverse finding against and deny relief by 
rejecting the claims of the appellant 
University. We also place on record the 
statement of the learned Senior Counsel for 
the appellant, which, in our view, even 
otherwise is the correct position of law, that 
the challenge of the appellant with reference 
to the Regulation in question and claim of 
AICTE that the appellant University should 
seek and obtain prior approval of AICTE to 
start a department or commence a new 
course or programme in technical education 
does not mean that they have no obligation 
or duty to conform to the standards and 
norms laid down by AICTE for the purpose 
of ensuring coordinated and integrated 
development of technical education and 
maintenance of standards.” 
 
44. 
In the case of Association of Management of 
Private Colleges Vs. All India Council of Technical 
Education and Others22, the dispute was between private 
colleges, 
including 
certain 
colleges 
affiliated 
to 
Bharathidasan University on one side and AICTE on the 
other, broadly on the same question which engaged this 
Court in the case of Bhartidasan University. In this 
decision, referring to certain portions of the judgment of 
this Court in the case of Parshvanath Charitable Trust 
(supra), it was held:- 
“52.  The italicised portions from the said 
 
22  (2013) 8 SCC 271 
50 
 
decision in Parshvanath Charitable Trust 
case [Parshvanath 
Charitable 
Trust v. All 
India Council for Technical Education, (2013) 
3 SCC 385] referred to supra would make it 
clear that the AICTE Act does not contain any 
evidence of an intention to belittle and 
destroy the authority or autonomy of other 
statutory bodies which they are assigned to 
perform. Further, the AICTE Act does not 
intend to be an authority either superior or 
to supervise or control the universities and 
thereby superimpose itself upon the said 
universities merely for the reason that it is 
laying down certain teaching standards in 
technical 
education 
or 
programmes 
formulated in any of the department or units. 
It is evident that while enacting the AICTE Act, 
Parliament was fully alive to the existence of 
the provisions of the UGC Act, 1956 
particularly, the said provisions extracted 
above. Therefore, the definition of “technical 
institution” in Section 2(h) of the AICTE Act 
which authorises AICTE to do certain things, 
special care has consciously and deliberately 
been taken to make specific mention of 
university, 
wherever 
and 
whenever AICTE alone 
was 
expected 
to 
interact 
with 
a 
university 
and 
its 
departments 
as 
well 
as 
constituent 
institutions and units. It was held after 
analysing the provision of Sections 10, 11 
and 12 of the AICTE Act that the role of the 
inspection 
conferred 
upon AICTE vis-à-vis 
universities is limited to the purpose of 
ensuring proper maintenance of norms and 
standards in the technical education system 
so as to conform to the standards laid down 
by it with no further or direct control over 
such universities or scope for any direct 
action except bringing it to the notice of UGC. 
In 
that 
background, 
this 
Court 
in Bharathidasan 
University 
case [Bharathidasan University v. All India 
Council for Technical Education, (2001) 8 SCC 
676] made it very clear by making the 
observation that it has examined the scope of 
the enactment as to whether the AICTE Act 
prevails over the UGC Act or the fact of 
competent entries fall in List I Entry 66 vis-
à-vis List III Entry 25 of Schedule VII of the 
Constitution. 
 
51 
 
53. A cumulative reading of the aforesaid 
paragraphs 
of Bharathidasan 
University 
case [Bharathidasan University v. All India 
Council for Technical Education, (2001) 8 SCC 
676] which are extracted above makes it very 
clear 
that 
this 
Court 
has 
exempted 
universities, 
its 
colleges, 
constituent 
institutions and units from seeking prior 
approval from AICTE. Also, from the reading 
of paras 19 and 20 of Parshvanath Charitable 
Trust 
case [Parshvanath 
Charitable 
Trust v. All 
India 
Council 
for 
Technical 
Education, (2013) 3 SCC 385] it is made clear 
after careful scanning of the provisions of 
the AICTE Act and the University Grants 
Commission 
Act, 
1956 
that 
the 
role 
of AICTE vis-à-vis universities is only advisory, 
recommendatory 
and 
one 
of 
providing 
guidance and has no authority empowering 
it to issue or enforce any sanctions by itself. 
 
54. It is rightly pointed out from the affidavit 
filed by UGC as directed by this Court in 
these cases on the question of affiliated col-
leges to the university, that the affidavit is 
very mechanical and it has simply and gra-
tuitously without foundation, added as tech-
nical institutions including affiliated colleges 
without any legal foundation. Paras 13, 14, 
15 and 19 of the affidavit filed by UGC and 
the assertion made in Para 23 is without any 
factual foundation, which reads as under: 
“That it is further submitted that 
affiliated 
colleges 
are 
distinct 
and 
different than the constituent colleges. 
Thus, it cannot be said that constituent 
colleges also include affiliated colleges.” 
 
Further, the assertion of UGC as rightly 
pointed out by Dr Dhavan in the written 
submission filed on behalf of the appellant in 
CA No. 1145 of 2004 that the claim that UGC 
does not have any provision to grant approval 
of technical institution, is facile as it has 
already been laid down by this Court that the 
AICTE norms can be applied to the affiliated 
colleges through UGC. It can only advise 
UGC for formulating the standards of 
education and other aspects to UGC. In view 
of the law laid down in Bharathidasan 
University [Bharathidasan University v. All 
India Council for Technical Education, (2001) 
52 
 
8 SCC 676] and Parshvanath Charitable Trust 
[Parshvanath Charitable Trust v. All India 
Council for Technical Education, (2013) 3 SCC 
385] cases, the learned Senior Counsel Dr 
Dhavan has rightly submitted for rejection of 
the affidavit of UGC, which we have to accept 
as 
the 
same 
is 
without 
any 
factual 
foundation and also contrary to the intent 
and object of the Act.”  
 
 
45. 
Learned counsel appearing for different institutions 
in this set of appeals have broadly supported the 
arguments advanced on behalf of CoA. Learned counsel for 
the Muslim Educational Association [the appellant in 
SLP(C) No.28121 of 2018] has assailed the decision of the 
Calicut University refusing to give affiliation to the said 
institution. Reference has been made to regulation 15(3) of 
the Minimum Standards of Architectural Education 
Regulation, 2015, which gives 3 years to provide the 
building for different infrastructural facilities for a college 
coming within the ambit of the said Act. In fact, it has been 
argued on behalf of the said institution that the University 
could not demand AICTE approval and within the State of 
Kerala, 
there 
were 
many 
institutions 
imparting 
architectural education solely on the basis of recognition 
granted under the 1972 Act.  
46. 
In the case of Bharathidasan University (supra), 
this Court found that in the 1987 Act, there is a distinction 
53 
 
made by the legislature between a technical institution per 
se and certain other kinds of institutions over which some 
other kind of monitoring or supervision is there by properly 
constituted universities. That would be apparent from the 
definition of technical institution under the 1987 Act. 
Sections 10 (k) and (m) of the 1987 Act also specifically 
deal with technical institution. Thus the 1987 Act 
recognises the distinguishing feature of a technical 
institution not being a university. The Council constituted 
under it has supervisory and monitoring power over 
technical institutions not being a university imparting 
courses in technical education. This was one of the main 
reasoning as to why it was found by this Court in the case 
of Bharathidasan University (supra) that the said 
university would remain out of the regulatory ambit of the 
AICTE.  Broadly the same logic was followed in the other 
authority, Association of Management of Private 
Colleges (supra). The case of Adhiyaman Educational 
and Research Institute and Others (supra), was 
distinguished in this decision and the relevant paragraphs 
in that regard have been referred to earlier in this 
judgment.  None of the authorities cited on behalf of the 
AICTE, however, deals with a situation where there is a 
54 
 
pre-existing Central legislation dealing with overlapping 
power on the same subject coming within the definition of 
“technical education”.  
47. 
CoA in these appeals wants to establish its pre-
dominance on the ground that the 1972 Act is a special 
Act and AICTE’s stand on the other hand is that the 1987 
Act having come to the statue book on a later date, the 
provisions thereof ought to prevail when the same are in 
conflict with an earlier statute. As a proposition of law, we 
accept AICTE’s stand that there need not be complete 
identity in the subject-matters of the two rival statutes 
being tested in the yardstick of point of time of their 
commencement of operation. Again, as a proposition of 
law, the principle of law canvassed by the rival bodies are 
accepted 
tools 
of 
construction. 
But 
they 
require 
application having regard to the specific circumstances of 
a given case. It is not an absolute proposition of law that a 
later Act would always prevail over the former in the event 
there are clashing provisions even if there is no express 
provision of repeal.  In the case of Ajoy Kumar Banerjee 
(supra), it was held, referring to Maxwell on the 
Interpretation of Statutes, Twelfth Edition:- 
55 
 
 “39.  From the text and the decisions, four tests are 
deducible and these are :(i) the Legislature has the 
undoubted right to alter a law already promulgated 
through subsequent legislation, (ii) A special law 
may be altered, abrogated or repealed by a later 
general law by an express provision, (iii) A later 
general law will override a prior special law if the 
two are so repugnant to each other that they cannot 
co-exist even though no express provision in that 
behalf is found in the general law, and (iv) It is only 
in the absence of a provision to the contrary and of 
a clear inconsistency that a special law will remain 
wholly unaffected by a later general law.” 
 
48. 
We shall examine now as to whether the 1972 Act 
fits the description of a special legislation so as to prevail 
over a subsequent enactment covering its field or area of 
operation.  A special law implies a statute covering a 
particular subject specifically.  The subject of conflict in 
the present proceedings is architectural education. The 
1972 Act however does not solely deal with architectural 
education.  The Act intends to control or regulate the 
profession of architects.  It has two main features, one part 
dealing with regulating the profession of architect and the 
other part regulating architectural education. Significant 
portion of the statute deals with formation of the CoA but 
the function of that body is essentially to regulate and 
monitor the other two areas of this statue. So far as effect 
of recognition is concerned, Section 17 of the 1972 Act 
stipulates:-    
56 
 
“17. Effect of recognition.- Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law, but subject 
to the provisions of this Act, any recognised 
qualification shall be a sufficient qualification for 
enrolment in the register.” 
 
49. 
The 1987 Act deals with technical education and in 
particular 
the 
methodology 
for 
approval 
technical 
institutions and their monitoring.  The dispute has arisen 
in these proceedings as architecture has been included 
with other subjects in the definition of “technical 
education” [Section 2 (g)].  Dr. Dhavan wants us, in effect, 
to exclude the subject of architecture from the said 
definition clause while construing the applicability of the 
Regulations for approval of a technical institution and its 
subsequent monitoring.  He has referred to the opening 
sentence of Section 2 of the 1987 Act, which contains the 
definitions and reads:- 
  
“In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires..”    
Such context, according to him can be external, outside 
the specific statute and includes other subsisting 
legislations. Before we deal with this submission, we shall 
refer to certain other key features of the two enactments.  
50. 
The provisions of 1987 Act have not been 
immunised by a non-obstante clause like the one 
57 
 
employed in Section 17 of the 1972 Act.  Having regard to 
the scheme and provisions of these two statutes, ex-facie 
it is difficult to label either of them as special law or general 
law. The 1987 Act has certain features of a special law 
being devoted to setting up, supervision and monitoring of 
institutions imparting technical education. But the said 
statute does not cover technical education imparted by all 
types of institutions.  The exceptions have been clearly 
mentioned in Section 2(h) of the act and explained in the 
cases 
of 
Bharathidasan 
University 
(supra) 
and 
Association of Management of private colleges (supra).  
So far as the 1972 Act is concerned, its application is not 
confined to architecture education alone. This enactment 
contemplates establishing the Council of Architecture, 
recognizing degrees and diplomas in architecture and 
regulating the profession of architects.  But there is inter-
link between architecture education and registration of 
architects, on which aspect we shall dilate later in this 
judgment. 
51. 
Under both the statutes there are overlapping areas 
under which the respective Councils could make 
Regulations. Though these Acts, by themselves, do not 
58 
 
come into direct conflict the inconsistencies have surfaced 
in implementing the power given to the Councils 
constituted under the respective enactments. AICTE 
contends that the later statute ought to prevail and as a 
corollary the regulations framed under the later statute 
should prevail. CoA wants its power to eclipse AICTE’s 
dominant role as a regulator in relation to architectural 
education on the strength of the 1972 Act being a special 
Act. The three regulations under the 1987 Act which have 
been brought to our notice do not directly lay down any 
specific norm or standard which ought to be followed. 
Such norms appear to have been set by the AICTE in 
pursuance 
of 
the 
aforesaid 
regulations. 
The 
two 
Regulations of 1994 do not lay down specifically such 
norms. The 2016 regulations has provision for Approval 
Process Hand Book which may be published from time to 
time laying down the manner in which approval shall be 
given.  
52. 
In the case of State of Tamil Nadu and Another 
(supra), conflict was between State Legislations, being 
Tamil Nadu Private Colleges (Regulation) Act, 1976 and 
59 
 
Madras University Act 1923 and the provisions of 1987 
Act. In this judgment it was, inter-alia, held :- 
 
 
“30. A comparison of the Central Act and the University 
Act will show that as far as the institutions imparting 
technical education are concerned, there is a conflict 
between and overlapping of the functions of the Council 
and the University. Under Section 10 of the Central Act, it 
is the Council which is entrusted with the power, 
particularly, to allocate and disburse grants, to evolve 
suitable performance appraisal systems incorporating 
norms and mechanisms for maintaining accountability of 
the technical institutions, laying down norms and 
standards for courses, curricula, staff pattern, staff 
qualifications, assessment and examinations, fixing norms 
and guidelines for charging tuition fee and other fees, 
granting approval for starting new technical institutions or 
introducing new courses or programmes, to lay down 
norms or granting autonomy to technical institutions, 
providing guidelines for admission of students, inspecting 
or causing to inspect colleges, for withholding or 
discontinuing of grants in respect of courses and 
programmes, declaring institutions at various levels and 
types fit to receive grants, advising the Commission 
constituted under the Act for declaring technical 
educational institutions as deemed universities, setting up 
of National Board of Accreditation to periodically conduct 
evaluation on the basis of guidelines and standards 
specified and to make recommendations to it or to the 
Council or the Commission or other bodies under the Act 
regarding recognition or de-recognition of the institution 
or the programme conducted by it. Thus, so far as these 
matters are concerned, in the case of the institutes 
imparting technical education, it is not the University Act 
and the University but it is the Central Act and the Council 
created under it which will have the jurisdiction. To that 
extent, after the coming into operation of the Central Act, 
the provisions of the University Act will be deemed to have 
become unenforceable in case of technical colleges like the 
engineering colleges. As has been pointed out earlier, the 
Central Act has been enacted by Parliament under Entry 
66 of List I to coordinate and determine the standards of 
technical institutions as well as under Entry 25 of List III. 
The provisions of the University Act regarding affiliation of 
technical colleges like the engineering colleges and the 
conditions for grant and continuation of such affiliation by 
the University shall, however, remain operative but the 
conditions that are prescribed by the University for grant 
and continuance of affiliation will have to be in conformity 
with the norms and guidelines prescribed by the Council 
60 
 
in respect of matters entrusted to it under Section 10 of 
the Central Act.” 
53. The case of Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation 
Limited (supra) also gives primacy to the AICTE on the 
question of necessity for an engineering college to obtain 
approval from the AICTE. In this case, question arose on 
the point as to whether engineering degree courses 
operated by colleges could be conducted by open 
universities through distance learning mode in absence 
of approval by the AICTE. This case and the case of 
Parshvnath Charitable Trust and Others (supra) have 
been discussed in the preceding paragraphs. These 
authorities cited on behalf of the AICTE however do not 
deal with conflict arising from two Regulations framed 
under two Central statutes, both conferring regulatory 
powers over a particular subject in the field of technical 
education on two different statutory bodies. The ratio of 
the decision in the case of Bharathidasan University 
(supra), expanded by the two Judge Bench judgment in 
the case of Association of Management of Private 
Colleges (supra) have been cited in support of CoA’s 
contention that the 1972 Act should be treated as a 
61 
 
special statute and Regulations framed thereunder 
should override those framed under the 1987 Act. 
54. For the sole reason of there being overlapping 
subjects, Courts straightaway may not get into an 
exercise to find out if one statute intends to eclipse the 
other. But in the present set of appeals, intention of the 
legislature to override one by the other can be examined 
by analyzing the provisions of the two statutes.  The duty 
of the regulatory bodies in a situation of this nature would 
be to come out with a unified regime, which this Court 
expected in the case of Municipal Council, Palia (supra).  
The two regulatory bodies in the field of architectural 
education however have not taken this approach and on 
the other hand have engaged themselves in a dispute over 
turf-control. 
In 
such 
a 
situation, 
under 
normal 
circumstances 
attempt 
should 
be 
made 
first 
at 
reconciliation of the competing statutory instruments. If 
that exercise fails, then the aim would be to find out what 
is the dominant purpose or principal subject-matter of a 
particular statute and then construe the conflicting 
provisions of the respective Regulations to match the 
dominant statutory purpose.   In the case of L.I.C. Vs. 
62 
 
D.J. Bahadur (supra), it has been observed by a three 
Judge Bench of this Court: - 
“ 52. In determining whether a statute is a special 
or a general one, the focus must be on the principal 
subject-matter plus the particular perspective.  For 
certain purposes, an Act may be general and for 
certain other purposes it may be special and we 
cannot blur distinctions when dealing with finer 
points of law.  In law, we have a cosmos of 
relativity, not absolutes-so too in life.” 
55. On the subject of implied repeal, the course to be 
followed by the Court has been explained in the                 
well-known text “Principles of Statutory Interpretation”, 
by Justice G.P. Singh (14th Edition). We give below the 
following quotation from page 737 of this text:-  
“There is a presumption against a repeal by 
implication; and the reason of this rule is based 
on the theory that the Legislature while enacting 
a law has complete knowledge of the existing 
laws on the same subject-matter, and therefore, 
when it does not provide a repealing provision, it 
gives out an intention not to repeal the existing 
legislation. When the new Act contains a 
repealing section mentioning the Acts which it 
expressly repeals, the presumption against 
implied 
repeal 
of 
other 
laws 
is 
further 
strengthened on the principle expressio unius est 
exclusio alterius. Further, the presumption will 
be comparatively strong in case of virtually 
contemporaneous Acts. The continuance of 
existing legislation, in the absence of an express 
provision of repeal, being presumed, the burden 
to show that there has been a repeal by 
implication lies on the party asserting the same. 
The presumption is, however, rebutted and a 
repeal is inferred by necessary implication when 
the provisions of the later Act are so inconsistent 
with or repugnant to the provisions of the earlier 
Act ‘that the two cannot stand together’. But, if 
the two may be read together and some 
63 
 
application may be made of the words in the 
earlier Act, a repeal will not be inferred.”      
 
56. 
Having regard to the disputes involved in each of 
these appeals, proper course for us would be to find out 
the decision of which of these two regulatory bodies ought 
to prevail. For this purpose, it is necessary to ascertain the 
dominant purpose of the two legislations covering the field 
of architectural education. Section 10 of the 1987 Act 
mandates the AICTE to undertake the duties on the 
subjects specified therein. But it has already been held by 
two Benches of this Court comprising of two Judges each 
in the cases of Bharathidasan University (supra) and 
Association of Management of Private Colleges (supra) 
that a university or its affiliate colleges could run courses 
in technical education without approval of the AICTE.   
57. 
The process of recognition and effect thereof are 
more expansive under the 1972 Act. All “authorities” 
require recognition by the Central Government to conduct 
any degree or diploma course in architecture education to 
qualify for being recognised qualification. The CoA under 
the said Act plays a key role in the process of recognition. 
There is no exclusion or exemption of any institution from 
undergoing such recognition process except the subsisting 
64 
 
ones at the time the Act became operational.  The CoA has 
also wide monitoring power under Section 18 and 19 of the 
Act 
of 
every 
authority 
which 
grants 
recognized 
qualification under the said Act.  
58. 
Moreover, Section 17 of the said Act is armed with a 
non-obstante clause. The implication of the said clause in 
Section 17 of the 1972 Act is that to be on the register of 
architects in India, recognized qualification would be 
sufficient.  There is no provision under the 1972 Act or in 
any Rule thereunder which would entitle a person trained 
from an AICTE approved technical 
institution in 
architecture to describe himself as an architect or get 
himself registered as such without recognised qualification 
under the 1972 Act.  This would be apparent from the 
provisions of Section 35 of the Act, which stipulates:- 
“35. Effect of registration.—(1) Any reference in 
any law for the time being in force to an architect 
shall be deemed to be a reference to an architect 
registered under this Act. 
(2) After the expiry of two years from the date ap-
pointed under sub-section (2) of Section 24, a per-
son who is registered in the register shall get pref-
erence for appointment as an architect under the 
Central or State Government or in any other local 
body or institution which is supported or aided from 
the public or local funds or in any recognised by the 
Central or State Government.” 
65 
 
Sub-section (2) of the said provision is not of much 
relevance for adjudication of the subject dispute. The 
scheme of the Act thus demonstrates that lack of 
recognized qualification under the 1972 Act would in 
substance disentitle a person from being registered as an 
architect. He would not be able to legally represent himself 
as an architect in India. This being the statutory mandate, 
CoA’s role in the process of recognition of qualification of 
an architect cannot be said to have been obliterated by the 
1987 Act. It is a fact that 1987 Act is primarily concerned 
with setting-up and running of a technical institution and 
not with regulating the professions of individuals 
qualifying from such institutions. But under the 1972 Act, 
conducting a course on architectural education and 
regulating the profession of architect are statutorily 
interwoven. Recognition of degrees or diplomas in 
architecture cannot be amputated from the said Act and 
held to have been replaced by the 1987 Act. That would 
render the 1972 enactment unworkable. 
59. 
The third distinguishing element of the 1972 Act is 
that the CoA is not the ultimate decision-making authority 
but it is the Central Government in relation to process of 
66 
 
recognition of degree or diploma in architectural education 
or withdrawal thereof.  Such decision is required to be 
taken after consultation with the CoA. But since CoA has 
been conferred with power to make regulations in relation 
to, inter-alia, recognition norms and monitoring of 
institutions imparting architectural education, CoA’s role 
in such process is critical. The approval power of AICTE is 
direct. But in the event AICTE’s norms come into conflict 
with that of CoA, any report or representation the CoA may 
make to the Central Government would be dependent 
upon the decision of the Central Government. The Central 
Government’s decision, taken under the provisions of the 
1972 Act in such a case would obviously prevail, the latter 
being an authority superior to both the Councils 
constituted under the two statutes. 
60. 
AICTE is exercising its power to regulate institutions 
imparting architectural education on the strength of 
definition of technical education, which has been defined 
to mean programmes of education, research and training 
in architecture. The duty of the AICTE to regulate 
“technical education” is derived from the provisions of 
Section 10 of the 1987 Act. It has been contended on 
67 
 
behalf of the CoA, referring to the provisions of Section 2 
of the 1987 Act, that the context of regulating architecture 
education 
requires 
exclusion 
of 
the 
expression 
“architecture” from the definition of technical education. 
In the case of Pushpa Devi and others (supra), it has been 
held that it is permissible for the Court to refer to “internal 
and external context” while giving meaning to a definition 
contained in the interpretation clause of a statue. In this 
decision, it was observed that a word exhaustively 
expressed in the definition can have different meanings in 
different parts of a statute. Broadly, the same principle of 
construction has been adopted in the cases of Printers 
(Mysore) Ltd. and Another (supra) and Whirlpool 
Corporation (supra). 
In the case of K.V. Muthu (supra), it has been held:- 
“12. Where the definition or expression, 
as in the instant case, is preceded by the 
words “unless the context otherwise 
requires,” the said definition set out in 
the section is to be applied and given 
effect to but this rule, which is the 
normal rule may be departed from if 
there be something in the context to 
show that the definition could not be 
applied.” 
61.   So far as these appeals are concerned, to altogether 
exclude architecture from the purview of AICTE, that 
68 
 
expression, i.e. architecture would have to be dropped 
from the definition of technical education. In our opinion, 
if the issue is examined in the external context, which in 
this case would be the provisions of 1972 Act, such a 
course would be inevitable. In the event AICTE’s stand is 
to be accepted and CoA’s role is eliminated from the 
recognition process of architectural qualification, then a 
person having a degree or diploma from an AICTE 
approved institution only would in effect not be entitled 
to enrollment in the register of architects and would not 
be able to represent himself as an architect. Secondly, in 
view of the decisions of this Court in the cases of 
Bharatidasan University (supra) and Association of 
Management of Private Colleges (supra), there would be 
two 
parallel 
authorities 
regulating 
architectural 
education. CoA would regulate universities and affiliated 
colleges imparting such education while AICTE would 
supervise rest of the institutions. Moreover, the authority 
of Central Government to recognize qualifications in 
architecture education would stand obliterated by a body, 
AICTE and that too in respect of certain categories of 
technical institutions only. 
69 
 
62. The authorities we have referred to are for the 
proposition that a meaning different to what is ascribed 
in the definition clause can be given to a word in different 
parts of a statute if the context so demands. The subject-
dispute involved in these appeals requires omission of the 
word architecture from the definition of technical 
education. Such a course, in our opinion, is also a 
permissible tool of construction to prevent absurd or 
unworkable results flowing from a statute. Here we 
reproduce the following passage from “Bennion on 
Statutory Interpretation” by F A R Bennion, Fifth Edition 
published by Lexis Nexis (at page 972). 
“ Strained construction We have the authority of 
Lord Reid for the statement that, to avoid an 
unworkable result, a strained construction 
may be justified even where the enactment is 
not grammatically ambiguous. Lord Reid said 
that cases where it has properly been held that  
one word can be struck out of a statute and 
another substituted include the case where 
without such substitution the provision would 
be unworkable.” 
70 
 
  63.  
 We are of the opinion that in respect of the 
provisions of Section 2 (g) of the 1987 Act, the definition 
of “technical education” would have to be given such a 
construction and the word “architecture” should be 
treated to have been inapplicable in cases where the 
AICTE imports its regulatory framework for institutions 
undertaking technical education. There would however 
be no substitution because the context would not 
demand it. This construction of the definition clause is 
necessary as the external context requires it to prevent 
an unworkable outcome in implementation of the 1987 
Act. The principle of implied repeal cannot apply so far 
as the provisions relating to architecture education is 
concerned, on the basis of the 1987 Act having become 
operational. One of the dominant purposes of the 1972 
Act is recognition of qualifications on architecture. The 
registration of an architect is dependent upon 
acquisition of such recognised qualification. The said 
Act cannot be held to have been repealed by implication 
for the sole reason of inclusion of the word 
“architecture” in the definition of technical education. 
AICTE has failed to discharge its onus to establish the 
71 
 
said provisions of the 1972 Act was repealed by 
implication.  
   64. 
We accordingly hold that so far as recognition of 
degrees and diplomas of architecture education is 
concerned, the 1972 Act shall prevail. AICTE will not be 
entitled to impose any regulatory measure in connection 
with the degrees and diplomas in the subject of 
architecture. Norms and Regulations set by CoA and 
other specified authorities under the 1972 Act would 
have to be followed by an institution imparting 
education for degrees and diplomas in architecture. 
 65.  Now we shall turn to the individual appeals – 
(a) We sustain the judgment of the Bombay High Court 
forming subject-matter of Appeal No.364 of 2005. The 
appeal of the All India Council of Technical Education 
is dismissed.         
(b) Three appeals arose from the judgment of the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh, Gwalior Bench delivered on 
2nd February, 2011 in W.P. No. 315 of 2011.  These are 
Civil Appeal No……./2019 (arising out of SLP(C) 
No.5400/2011), Civil Appeal No……/2019 (arising out 
of SLP(C) No.8443/2011) and Civil Appeal No……/2019 
72 
 
(arising out of SLP(C) No.20460/2011). Rajeev Gandhi 
Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalyalay is the appellant in the 
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(C) No. 5400/2011. It 
wants compliance of the CoA norms and invalidation of 
the directive requiring it to grant temporary affiliation 
by the High Court without CoA’s approval.  The 
appellant in the second Civil Appeal (arising out of 
SLP(C)No.8443/2011) is the institution, Bharatiya 
Vidya Mandir Shiksha Samiti. It has questioned the 
necessity 
of 
obtaining 
CoA’s 
approval 
or 
the 
requirement of compliance with the conditions set by 
them. It wants compliance of AICTE norms to be treated 
as adequate.  For the reasons explained earlier in this 
judgment, we dismiss the appeal of Bharatiya Vidya 
Mandir Shiksha Samiti.  The High Court has directed 
in the judgment under appeal compliance of the 
conditions communicated by the CoA.  The academic 
session involved is 2010-2011.  This Court at the notice 
stage in the university’s appeal [SLP(C)No.5400 of 
2011] granted interim stay of the order of the High 
Court.  Subsequently, there were admissions from time 
to time with interim directions of this Court.  We 
accordingly dispose of this appeal of the Rajeev Gandhi 
73 
 
Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalaya with direction that the 
process of recognition contained in the 1972 Act ought 
to be implemented in respect of the subject institution 
before any further admission takes place.  But so far as 
admissions already undertaken in terms of interim 
orders of this Court, we direct that such admissions 
ought not be disturbed.  We direct so, as we find the 
High Court itself had directed compliance of CoA norms 
in the judgment under appeal and compliance of 
building requirements set by CoA was to be effected 
within one year. Thus, in our opinion, CoA norms were 
substantially directed to be complied with. We also 
make it clear that the AICTE would not have any 
regulatory control over the concerned institution so far 
as architecture education is concerned. We are of the 
opinion that in the appeal arising out of SLP(C) 
No.20460 of 2011 that CoA ought to have been 
impleaded as a party respondent in the said writ 
petition. We are also of the opinion that decision of the 
High Court to issue the directions contained in the 
judgment under appeal in absence of CoA being added 
in the array of respondents was erroneous. But we do 
not issue any independent direction as these appeals 
74 
 
were heard together as batch matters and the 
grievances of the CoA have been addressed to in our 
judgment. Having held that the 1972 Act shall prevail 
on the question of recognition of degrees and diplomas 
in architecture education, we dispose of this appeal of 
the CoA in the above terms. 
(c)  The Civil Appeals arising out of SLP(C) No. 17005 of 
2016 and SLP(C)No.17006 of 2016 have been instituted 
by the AICTE against a common judgment of the 
Karnataka High Court in Writ Appeal No.110 of 2013 
and Writ Appeal No. 112 of 2013. The dispute in these 
matters relate to the question of obtaining mandatory 
approval from the AICTE for running course on 
architecture. 
The 
former 
appeal 
arose 
out 
of 
contradictory directives issued by AICTE and CoA over 
admission of two students beyond the intake capacity.   
The observation of the Karnataka High Court in a 
common judgment has been that the controversies 
would be subject to the outcome of the appeal arising out 
of the Bench decision of the Bombay High Court. That is 
the first appeal we have dealt with in this judgment. We 
accordingly dispose of these two appeals in terms of our 
75 
 
decision contained in the preceding sub-paragraph (a). 
AICTE would not have any power to impose its regulatory 
measures on the concerned institution so far as 
architecture education is concerned. 
(d) The decision of the Kerala High Court in the Civil 
Appeal arising out of SLP(C)No. 28121 of 2018 is set 
aside. The appeal is allowed. The institution involved in 
this appeal shall be entitled to operate with recognition 
obtained under the 1972 Act. 
66. All interim orders passed in these appeals shall stand 
dissolved. All connected applications shall stand disposed of.   
There shall be no order as to costs.  
 
 
 
.......................................CJI. 
                                     (Ranjan Gogoi) 
 
 
 
   ..........................................J. 
 
                                 (Deepak Gupta) 
 
 
                                                   
..........................................J. 
                  (Aniruddha Bose) 
 
New Delhi  
Dated: November 08, 2019.    
 
