1
ITEM NO.13               COURT NO.1               SECTION PIL-W
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Writ Petition(s)(Civil)  No(s).  573/2017
K.M. KARTHIK                                       Petitioner(s)
                                VERSUS
THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                          Respondent(s)
(FOR ADMISSION)
Date : 31-07-2017 This petition was called on for hearing today.
CORAM : 
         HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
         HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
For Petitioner(s)
Mr. Diggaj Pathak, AOR
                   Ms. Shweta Sharma, Adv.
Mr. Abhishek Yadav, Adv.
Ms. Mishika Singh, Adv.
Mr. K.M. Karthik, Adv.
For Respondent(s)
                    
          UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
The petitioner has approached this Court under Article 32
of the Constitution of India, by raising the following prayers:
“i)
writ,  order  or  direction  in  nature  of
mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or
direction for regularizing and ensuring the timely
and complete payment of the staffs' salaries, in
all the private Engineering colleges in India, by
ECS(Electronic
 
Clearing
 
Service)
 
through
nationalized banks.  
ii)
writ,  order  or  direction  in  nature  of
mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order to
enforce the inspection at colleges within India and
to  verify  the  recommended  'student  staff  ratio',
which shall be verified by the 'annual salary paid
statements to staff and not only by 'identification
parades'.
Iii)
writ,  order  or  direction  in  nature  of
Digitally signed by
SARITA PUROHIT
Date: 2017.07.31
17:01:29 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified
2
mandamus  or  any  other  appropriate  writ  to  the
respondent no.1, respondent no.2, respondent no.3 &
respondent  no.5  that,  no  college  should
possess/withhold/collect  any  of  the  original
educational/professional certificates of any staff
member and provisions for imposition of penalty for
the same.
iv)
writ,  order  or  direction  in  nature  of
mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order for
establishment of a welfare board, or a directorate,
or  a  commission,  for  welfare  and  grievance
redressals of staffs working in private engineering
colleges all over the country.
v)
any  other  order  as  the  Hon'ble  Court  may
deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances
of  the  case  be  also  passed  in  favour  of  the
petitioner in the interest of justice.”
Having given our thoughtful consideration of the matter,
we are of the view that at the present juncture, it would suffice
if a direction is issued to the petitioner to submit the paper book
of the instant writ petition, to the Secretary of the All India
Council for Technical Education (for short 'AICTE').  The AICTE
shall  treat  the  same  as  a  representation,  and  shall  take  a
conscious decision in respect of issues canvassed, and take such
remedial action, as may be called for, in consonance with law.  
Disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
 
(PARVEEN KUMAR)                                 (RENUKA SADANA)
  AR CUM PS                                     ASST.REGISTRAR
